Speaker 1 00:00:01.290
Drums of life. Black woman. My name is Black. Our photographic explorations into Black life by Chester Higgins Junior. Hear him discuss the role and impact of the Black photographer on tonight's 'Soul of Reason'. This is 'Soul of Reason' a program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 2 00:01:02.980
Our guest on tonight soul of reason is Chester Higgins junior an outstanding young black photographer who has done some very very interesting things with film describing black life.  Glad to have you with us tonight.  Justin Glad to be here.  Now the occasion of our talking tonight has to do with the publication of your new book which is coming out immediately I understand.  And also an exhibition which is being held at the acts of art gallery describing the photography of Chester Higgins Junior and as a young man who really has only been doing this a long time but still in terms of chronology you're a young man.  I'd like to begin by talking about just how you got into photography and why you see it as your contribution to exploring black life.

Speaker 4 00:01:52.510
Okay so very interesting question because people always ask me why is it that someone who has a B.S. degree in Business Management decided to become a photographer.  And truthfully I have to say that in my junior year of college I became interested in not so much as a camera or other craft but in the media itself and the medium.  I was very disturbed.  This just was doing the civil rights days how black people were being portrayed in the media.  A classic example is I felt that when photographers too did pictures and called it symbolic of poverty and they showed a woman with 10 kids hanging around her her waist and looked like they're all going to die 10 minutes after he leave that that wasn't really how I saw those people and people who I knew or when they when a white photographer took pictures of a black militant or somebody in a demonstration and they put the title Black No tonight.

Speaker 5 00:02:51.820
They made him look like he was somebody who's who's about to jump into your suburban home and and kill your wife and rape your daughter.  And that's not how I saw these people either.  So I thought that there was a need to act for a more honest interpretation of a black life.  And I realized that of a lot of the exaggerations and voids new stereotypes typical voice came about because of lack of a real understanding on the part of the photographer.  Mostly being white or solely White at the time a lack of real intimate knowledge and understanding on their part exactly about who they're dealing with.  And they really did not deal with people as human beings but rather as objects of a particular definition of what they're supposed to be about rather than the person.

Speaker 6 00:03:39.120
Now you've taken this you've tended to develop your books at least in a thematic fashion by focusing on black identity.  Focusing on the black woman and now your new book drums of life focusing on the black male.  You've also documentary work with black children right.  In addition you are one of the photographers who either through your own writing or through writing in the case of drums of life.  The writing award Coombs attempts to interpret what your photographs are saying so that as the viewer the reader reads the book looks at the pictures he or she can get some identification of what you're trying to say.

Speaker 5 00:04:20.79.9999999999709
Yeah.  Because I feel that that's important because I want people to deal with one image but I want to deal with also the humanity of the person and I want to enlarge that whole scope of thinking to dealing with the universality of the experience of the moment of this time and space this time in life this time in history it is time and evolution about these emotions and the feelings that a person goes through that we all feel.  But then what does it all mean in terms of a larger scope to let's understand what it means on an elemental one to one basis but let's also understand what it means in a larger scope in terms of not only this person John on page 20 but this person as it represents a whole spectrum of life black life particular and life all over.

Speaker 6 00:05:14.230
Now as you have developed these themes you tend to break them into chronologies you tend to break them into looking at the black man the black woman the younger days you tend to look at them in their teenage explorations in their roles as parents as a matter of fact you have some very beautiful pictures of black men and their children.  JULIAN BOND Yeah.  Ex and one green Bible course in the book and this probably relates to your journalistic photographic enterprise you have photographed practically every major black figure.  Yeah sometime another in the past four or five years.  So in the book you have pictures of people like Percy Sutton and Roma Bearden a famous artist and Jesse Jackson and Julian Bond and on and on and on.  And this tends to bring a certain amount of contemporary ness to it at the same time I would assume that you hope the book has a timeliness to it time less ness to it in that it would be able to be viewed twenty years from now by people who are looking at black life and said yes I remember that.  That's the way it was.  And in fact maybe that's the way it is.

Speaker 5 00:06:28.450
Very true.  I am glad you said that because that is really what I'm sort of after D using whatever post I can that represent what life is about now to really put it in a timeless sort of situation but understanding that there are a couple important things that happen in our time that I would like to to bring attention to it and focusing on.  Oh let me.  You mentioned something about my my how I break my books up and I think that you probably wouldn't want to hear this because well I started off usually and especially the jumps of life what is just now being published by Doubleday anchor I start off with a bird scene and it ends almost with a death scene but it goes through from birth to teenage adolescence to teenagers to adults to to older people.  And it says a lot about how how I approach life in people.  And I'm the one who really believe in growth not so much as chronological growth but as mental growth as well growing up.  Any to any age is a difficult process and and only as we grow do we learn the kind of lessons about life and about people and about humanity and about wisdom from the cost we observe things are because people bring new information to us because we reach out and get information so the grown up process is well is very important to me is in the growth process of trying to become a full person trying to fill out one space and life.  To many people I look at the demise sometimes as like a house and too many people do not fill the first room whereas other people's really other people really stretch out and they try to fill each room when they do it consistently and their day but then they become a real full person.  Being able to enjoy in their life around them more so than someone who is not.  And I think and I think everybody has that potential.  Everybody unfortunate a lot of people do not apply themselves for that but you know there's no reason why they couldn't they shouldn't.  And I hope that my book sort of have a subconscious message to it that you know maybe you know we should develop a little more of this you know develop this room in my house and that room in our house a little more and you know pretty similar no stick for kind of person that I should be in I want to be and I can be of course you speaking of in a sense the universal dilemma of the photographer because a photographer.

Speaker 6 00:08:59.920
Really speaks through his lens and very seldom has the words even though you do have introductory hired words you explain this.  So in a sense what you choose to photograph the way you choose to photograph it and what you choose to project really represent your view of life right.  And photography books are excellent gifts.

Speaker 7 00:09:21.280
For example I believe you in a sense dedicate this book of life to your father.

Speaker 6 00:09:27.060
It was around your father's day time fathers good Father's Day game but it's also good to get a good gift for any particular occasion when you want to reach out to a somewhere either a pirate an uncle or a boyfriend or what have you.  Just as in the case of the black woman the same thing is true in terms of reaching out to your mother or to your grandmother or your lady friend or wife or what have you.  Social Sense.  This really is an additional part of this.  And there have been relatively few photography book Family Man of course sold strike.

Speaker 2 00:10:05.220
Okay so literally millions of copies some of Gordon Parks's poetry dash photography and so well.  But generally speaking photography books do not tend to sell that well because of the fact people think they're for special things right.  And really you can learn as much about the black experience looking through and discussing some of the photographs and drums of life as you can reading through many sociological treatises.

Speaker 5 00:10:34.120
I like to say this when we so that is that this book is very rare unique in one sense that it presents a very balanced positive picture about black life concentrate on black men you will not find a dope pushers you will not find the pimps she would not find the Superfly is in this book you will find positive people who are busy about trying to be a person and trying to relate to their own lives meaningfully to their sisters and to their brothers to their kids and to their families and understanding their responsibility to their community.

Speaker 2 00:11:05.270
Of course one of the things I noticed is that most of the pictures focus very directly on the face and torso.  You don't have a great deal of action Jack.  You don't have any action shots or sports figures doing their thing or musical figures doing their thing or politicians doing thing.  You focus on the picture you have purchased is walking down the street and you focusing on purchasing the beginning of Jesse sitting there getting himself ready for a speech rain picture.  You have with Julian Bond is sitting there with his son and daughter cookie.

Speaker 7 00:11:35.220
That's his daughter.  It's hard to tell it is hard to tell.  But the point is that you develop this in terms of the person right.  Particularly some of the pictures of some of the older men some of the working man.  Right.  Whether it be in the field or in the mine or in the logging yard or what have you.  You really reflect that.  And that is the kind of thing that helps people to understand what black lack is about.  On the other hand I think some people might criticize you by saying what you took out a slice.  And you focus only on those things which tend to reinforce family life and a strong male image.  What about these other things.  What about the pimp that hangs on a corner.  What about the kid who was cut in school.  What about the basketball player although you do have one of a basketball player close up on the court but what about these other things by your exclusions.  Are you in a sense trying to mold a particular picture of black life or are you saying that regardless of what other people see this is what I see and this is what I feel is important to me.  Well let me say a couple of things before we go on.  I said Yes I do concentrate on faces and torsos because I met Justin in projecting I think the person is very important.  The most important thing in the universe I'm interested in helping him project is humanity captain his character and his dignity in terms of families and I concentrate on that a lot but because I really believe that the family is the foundation of a society.  And when you break that family up and when you introduce a whole lot of negative things into that thing it has spiraling effect on other people that that that who come in contact with the products of family.  So I'm trying to project a very positive and very strong very healthy family kind of relationship in terms of the pimps and the and the addicts and things like that.  I admit I'm the first one to admit those things are true.  I again feel the grown up is a hard process.  And we are all going to be introduced and exposed to was negative around us.  And I want to make sure that we expose to the positive things around us.  I know that that the competition for show and things were negative it was so great that you know my little voice and when might not be heard.  But I think that if I'm going to be heard at all then I say we heard from a positive point of view.  Now I think also that in terms of the other good parts of our life you know that should be examined photographically fully journalistically.  What have you will be examined because we have a great deal of black photographers out there who are really good photographers.  The black photography annual US is one example.  Joe Crawford on the show a few weeks ago and we're talking about the black photographers annual I think Joe is doing a fantastic job.  I think that black photography thing was a fantastic piece of material that gives exposure to a lot of guys who are really doing the kinds of things that you that you just asked me here and I look forward to the day when those guys will be dealing with themes or put no work out that in exhibition form our book form or what have you showing the other side of black life.  I do not think that that I have to accept the responsibility to show the complete side.  You know I I I I can't see how anybody would expect that no artist really has to reflect the entire spectrum while he attempts to project.  I think the artist does best when he when he responds to what he feels inside of him and when he deals with things that he knows best.  And my response my my my my responses to the positive things I see around me that I want to say something about I acknowledge that other things exist but I know if I try to do something on them then it's not going to be great because it's interesting now I would hypothesize that in 1974 you Chester Higgins Junior went through the civil rights revolution and took certain pictures of what happened there with the figures they are all going through the same stage that others have gone through in terms of reaching for some type of emotional dash social equilibrium.

Speaker 6 00:15:41.820
And I find that your pictures are beautiful.  They reach out they say something but they do not have the stridency that I've seen in some of your other work of earlier vintage which came out of this great period of.  Ferment.  Now does that reflect how you just ignored Junior are at this time or does that really reflect a artistic growth of maturity or is that really the way the world is now.

Speaker 10 00:16:15.870
Well it's kind of hard to answer me if you mean it looks like my work is softening on last sentences seriously softening but in a sense it is this mellow right and say Yeah of black life that we all went through in the late 60s and early 70s is not reflected in your work.  And maybe it isn't reflected in the work of anyone although we do hear people say Well things really aren't any better.  And some parts of our ghettos things are really worse.  But even with that maybe we as black people aren't responding as we did.  Maybe you don't respond with that in a sense the so-called civil disruptions were explorations of hope and optimism.  Maybe in fact we have become more reflective.  Maybe we are pulling back to analyze where we are and then are going to strike out another direction.

Speaker 11 00:17:11.760
Well let me say this.  I do not think that this book is a makes a political statement.

Speaker 12 00:17:20.69.99999999988358
It makes a human statement about living about life.  It might even be like a breath of fresh air to say OK we've gone through this whole striking sort of thing and be spread ourselves thousands in different directions trying to deal with a thousand different things which is really pulled the bond of one individual person apart.  So maybe what I'm trying to say is that okay let's take time and the speed of fresh air and pull ourselves back together let's see that you know that we're worth living with each other.  I think true black love can only come from black friendship.  A friendship with our individual selves.  No one has to take place before we can be meaningful friends with anyone else.  You can't really excuse me love another person unless you love yourself.  You can't really love that other person unless you're friends with them first because love has a propensity to go all the way up all the way down never in between and you need a friendship to balance out understanding that.  I think that when I'm trying to do he is is you know give people a chance to sit down and breathe take a breath of fresh air.  And just zoom in on ourselves for a minute right.  And the more we zoom in ourselves understanding and getting used to ourselves I think.  The the clear things curve perspective.  We develop on how we approach other things outside of us because we all agree those things have to be dealt with.  I think that.  But.  You know what's the use of when a war and you lose yourself.  So let's try to do both sides together a very selective statement.

Speaker 6 00:18:57.480
I think it does accurately portray what comes across in the book.

Speaker 13 00:19:02.010
I know she called the book Dreams of life and I must admit this is a certain amount of conditioning.  I knew the book was about black men.  I expected to see some more work on African black men rather than the intensification that you've reflected on American black men.  But black men are African.

Speaker 7 00:19:23.290
Of course they are.  But like I said I didn't say that.  Well I'm a black man in Africa.  Black men in the Caribbean now again this is in a sense unfair.  At the same time provocative question because as we talk with intellectuals and artists and writers on solar reason what we try to do is to explore with them why they do what they do right the kind of things that cause all of us and whatever our mode of creative activity is.

Speaker 10 00:19:50.730
And you did in a sense more or less decide not to deal with black men in Africa or black men in the Caribbean.  I say and you focused on black men in this part of the African diaspora namely North America United States the urban cities the South etc..

Speaker 9 00:20:11.580
Well let me say this I appreciate that question because that gives me an opportunity to say a couple of things.  One is that I am very concerned about understanding who I am.  The people around me who we are and first of all I'm a black man.  I live in America.  My mother and my relatives and all live here.  So I think there's a commitment to understand where I come from.  Here as well as a commitment to understand where we all come from in Africa.  So I think I should explore my American experience as much as possible so I can get a real true understanding of what it means to understand when you see a black woman put her hand on a hip and Alabama that I've seen the same thing in Accra Ghana and I know what and I know what that all means I can I can not speak a language in Senegal where black people I cannot speak French or Wolof but I can see what black people do and I know what's happening because it's a universal thing that happens.  I'm now in the process of finishing up a book on Africa.  I'll go back to summer.  I think I believe in about a month ago and finished that book up up in Africa now about six times in the silence and fellowships and Ford Foundation gave me a fellowship last year to go and work for it also have supported this book and gave me a fellowship to work on that.  But this summer I go back and try to finish up an Africa book which would be mostly colored in black and white dealing with the people and the place and with African men and African women.  But one thing about this book and jumps and I said it in my preface I said that one reason I call it drama said I see the drama as a number one spiritual mover in the universe.  It has always been a dominant force in heritage and culture of black folks because of his force.  We moved his power as it permeates our whole being in that life force that ability to touch everything with power and love.  That's what I celebrate in the lives of the black men in this book.  And that's what jumps to life is about I make that it can be extended to African African men but I didn't do so because I want to confine a particular statement here and then I go out and make that statement and another place in his own book on that now speaking of statements one of the things that you said as we opened the program is the fact that as a black photographer you were trying to reflect positive things or reflect the realities of black life as you as a black man see them.

Speaker 13 00:22:38.350
And of course that raises a question which I'm sure you've been asked many times and that is exactly how does a black photographer not necessarily just the Hague and the black photographer and general attempt to approach their work differently than white photographers.  Let's talking about not taking a picture of a building that let's talk about taking a picture of black people or black life.

Speaker 9 00:23:01.950
Well I think the basic difference that shows in the photographs is one of a degree of understanding and intimate knowledge of the subject.  As I get back to the poverty scene oh a white photographer who makes forty thousand dollars a year living Yonkers cannot expect to see a woman who only has nigh on 100 dollars a year and have 10 kids.  He can only expect to see her life in a certain way because his reference points a difference.  I think that by and large it does dusty difference and I think the amount of understanding one brings to a subject depends on how one perceives it and how one's interpretation of it.  And when you are involved in a real living relationship and you understand people's situations but you also understand how they fit into their life and who they are and what that really says about that person how they deal with it then that breeds a certain kind of understanding a certain kind of respect a certain kind of sensitivity a certain kind of love a certain kind of admiration for that person that comes through and balances out that situation against a person so that you have a more realistic statement.

Speaker 14 00:24:10.930
That's just more honest when you put that statement forward and I'm saying that white photography sometimes very often understand the situation but they don't understand a person in that situation.  So therefore you have a slanted interpretation of what that total thing means.  But I'm saying black photographers come to it understanding not only the situation but also the person and they feed that into their mind and like a computer and it balances out.  Well the honest statement.  Well it really is.  And by and large I think we get much better pictures from black photographers on black people.  But I think the same is true not only with black people I'm sure a single teacher would Orientals should it or I can never see an Oriental the way an Oriental photographer sees his woman or his other men around him.  I'm sure I never could interpret the life of white people the way a white photographer would take them.  I never would have taken pictures like Diane Arbus took away people only she understood that sort of psychological ramification of those people plus a little of a trap in that type of reasoning.  For example Gordon Parks whom you know well.

Speaker 1 00:25:12.840
Developed his reputation as a photographer on life taking pictures of famous people white people black people Asian people all over the world and it had a particular touch.  Right.  And I'm sure known Gordon as I do you do.  He would probably say he could probably take a picture of anything and interpreted well and I think quite possibly Chester Higgins Junior would take a picture of anything and interpret it well.  I kind of get a feeling as I hear you talk that you're really not talking about technique per say but you're talking about what one as a black photographer chooses to photograph in terms of the life experience of life space to journalistic expression.  And behind that.  How you choose to compose your work what you choose to select from the you know when you go out do you take the shot you must take 40 50 shots what you choose to select from that to publish.  I really think that's the least that's what comes across to me.

Speaker 9 00:26:19.870
Yeah I think that that's that's that's very much the crux of it.  I am saying that you know I do believe as Gordon has pointed out to me many times over because we've been we've been trying to talk about this is that you know.

Speaker 8 00:26:38.470
We can't Blackfoot there's no reason why black photographers can't take pictures of white people or Orientals and white white photographers can't take pictures of black people.  And there have been a few white photographers who've done a very outstanding jobs in this area and one has been suing me.  Eugene Smith and I'm saying that for every Eugene Smith who has done very good a very good job on black people I can think of another 85 that didn't.  So we're really talking about percentages right.  The percentages of doing a more honest job on black people is much higher.

Speaker 2 00:27:10.870
When a black photographer worked with a picture and sensitivity sensitivity as we come to the close of our program I might mention that you have an exhibition of your work at the acts of art gallery at 15 Charles Street here in Greenwich Village New York City which is just another way of Chester Higgins reaching out to the public.  Our guest on tonight soul of reason has been Chester Higgins junior who has just published with Doubleday anchor a new book drums of life which is a photographic exploration of the black male which complements his great book on the black woman.  We glad that you came with us tonight.  Don sole reason and just I'd like to wish you lots of luck in your new work.  Thank you very much.  I need it.

Speaker 15 00:27:50.710
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 3 00:28:05.080
Soul of reason is produced by the WNBA public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.  Please join us again next week.

