Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.320
The phenomenal success of the television production of Alex Haley's book ROOTS has stimulated great interest in Black and white Americans about the Black experience. Tonight on SOUL OF REASON, Florence Jackson, Center Director of the Center for Humanities and the Arts of the New York City Board of Education, will discuss how this new student interest will be used in the schools.

Radio Bumper intro 00:00:44.760
This is SOUL OF REASON, a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:11.710
With us on SOUL OF REASON tonight is Florence Jackson, who's been with us before, talking about a number of wonderful things that they're doing in the Board of Education in the Center for Humanities and the Arts. And tonight we're going to be talking about what everybody else is talking about which is ROOTS. Glad to have you with us tonight Florence.

Florence Jackson 00:01:28.140
Thank you very much for inviting me. I'm delighted to be here.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:31.140
Well first of all what was your personal reaction to the television production, as well as the book, but particularly the television production; and what about the allegation that some people say that it was really too much soap opera?

Florence Jackson 00:01:44.850
Well first of all my very first reaction was: this was long overdue. This was a series that we should have had on television even ten years ago when many more people were becoming conscious and looking at our American history again and re-evaluating what were the ideas and concepts placed in our textbooks. It is not too much soap opera. I mean that kind of statement says that it wasn't -- or intimates that it wasn't -- authentic and that it was just someone telling a story. And this was really history that was being brought before millions of people in the United States. It was done in a format that I think people could relate to. People could understand. People could begin to see what relationships between people might be and could become if they are conscious of some of the conditions that have made the situation in the United States where it is today in terms of racial attitudes. I thought also that it was a review of human experiences. There were opportunities for the watcher and the listener to see what attitudes were like during the slavery period about which most of this production dealt with. It also gave some other insights, for example when we looked at Izzy [sic] and the master's daughter and saw how two children had at an early age developed a close relationship, that the master's daughter even taught Izzy [sic] how to read -- she thought that much about her -- how this relationship, because of the attitudes of the period, were able to fall apart, disintegrate, and have the master/slave attitude superimposed on it so that the master's daughter began to look at Izzy [sic] or did eventually look [CROSSTALK] Kizzy? [CROSSTALK] Right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:47.880
[CROSSTALK] Kunta Kinte's daughter, Kizzy. And I understand in the schools at least that Kunta Kinte is the hero today.

Florence Jackson 00:03:54.360
Right. Right. Kids are really talking about him.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:56.990
As a matter of fact I've predicted already, from a commercial point of view, that next Christmas there are going to be Kizzy dolls [CROSSTALK] and Kunta Kinte dolls.

Florence Jackson 00:04:05.910
I think they'll be bought too. But I thought that this showed people, in a very realistic manner, how we have destroyed relationships among people -- among two people ... among many people -- because of superimposed ideas and values which really should not have happened at all... but anyhow they happened. And I think even today some of those attitudes might be a little bit more subtle, but they still happen and I think they still have an effect on children all over the country.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:36.550
What you really are saying is that the master/slave relationship, in part, still exists.

Florence Jackson 00:04:42.980
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:43.271
In our society.

Florence Jackson 00:04:44.220
Yes, in a more subtle form. [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:46.504
Blacks are not supposed to be the master or in charge... not so much the master. And even when one does ascend to a position of leadership over whites some whites have difficulty accepting that. And of course that really is the type of thing that Jimmy Carter himself is trying to deal with. [CROSSTALK] He is one of those white people who grew up around Black people most of the people he grew up around were Black. And in some instances he was almost... his family was right out in the fields picking cotton and peanuts along with the rest of them.

Florence Jackson 00:05:20.080
Right. Which is another example how there was a relationship that was going on in those two situations that you just mentioned about Carter and his background that hopefully *his* relationship has not changed. Maybe he was able to transcend all of the other kinds of attitudes that were existing around him which is a tremendous feat I think for anyone to do. And I don't think many people can really transcend. Maybe a few have been able to do this, but great numbers do not.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:50.630
And of course the other thing the book and the film both show is just how indigenous racism is to American culture. That basically it's something that goes back to the 15th and 16th century and has been perpetuated in all types of very, very strident forms so much so that one of the criticisms of the book, but more of the television production, is that at the end where Chicken George and his family go off to Tennessee, it's like they went to some kind of Shangri-La. [CROSSTALK] Anybody who knows what Tennessee was like in the early 20th century knows damn well that it wasn't a Shangri-La. [CROSSTALK] So that one criticism of the television production is that even though it did show some of the brutalities and the realities of slavery, the end was the typical happy end [CROSSTALK] as the family melts off into the sun to seek a new life.

Florence Jackson 00:06:50.430
I think traditionally we have been faced with that kind of ending, and people look for that kind of ending, and that's unfortunate that the program did end in that way, because it seems to say to us: well from then on -- not only with that particular family, but with the rest of Black people -- life had become much better, which was a false impression as we all know.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:12.450
But of course the thing that I frequently wonder about when people say that, that it will cause white people to think things are really not so bad for Blacks -- since I'm Black and really can't get in the skin of a white person... inside a white person -- I can't really understand how anybody walks the streets in America and looks around and can't understand how things are really different for Black people and how Black people basically are oppressed. But if you read Jimmy Breslin's column in THE SUNDAY NEWS the week after ROOTS had shown, he went into a ball -- a predominantly white ball in Ridgewood or somewhere -- and he described how those people sitting there said, oh they weren't so bad. And when Kinte was whipped: what's a little whipping? Which does suggest that we need a lot more interpretation.

Florence Jackson 00:08:02.520
I think though that those kinds of responses are kind of a defense to cover guilt. When you say that it doesn't happen or that it wasn't as bad as you're portraying it to be means that you don't want to accept the idea that that is what really happened. And so even though they give those kinds of answers you realize that what these people need are a little bit more help and a sense of under... really understanding and being able to admit to themselves that this really happened and that remnants of that situation still exist today in other forms so that I would not take what they say at face value. I'd say we need to help them.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:41.970
All right well speaking of helping them one of your jobs in schools is to help people develop an understanding of their heritage and so on. And I was wondering immediately what was the impact on Black/white relations in the public schools of New York City right after the showing of ROOTS. Because it was reported in the press that in some parts of the country there were mini riots or fights or conflicts between the Black students and white students. To what extent did that happen in New York City? To what extent was the immediate reaction one that was either positive or negative.

Florence Jackson 00:09:18.570
Well first of all I have not had any reports of any white/Black relations exploding into any kind of violence or fights or anger or anything of that kind. The reports I got were rather positive because, first of all, the series became a talking point. If you didn't see the first section of the series, someone would tell you about it and then you begin to look at the second and the third, and you had a conversational point going so that you had a positive idea that people could begin to talk about. It might have been what I would consider a lower level, in that they would talk about specific actors or actresses you know let's say something like: oh Leslie Uggams, well I know her as a singer, I never knew she could do a dramatic role. All right that was fine, but it was a starting point. From there they could get into the content of the series in terms of what was actually going on. I mean there were comments such as: I didn't realize that the slavery period was really as bad as that. People were very upset when a foot was chopped off of a slave who ran away. You know it was really brutal and it really brings you up to see the facts as they really are, that these things actually occurred. But when you read about it, it does not, I think, sink in as greatly as it does when you see it on the screen. [CROSSTALK] It becomes more vivid, more alive, more real.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:47.970
And that reality caused many Blacks to have their anger intensified. I talked to a number of people, including a number of professional people, who work closely with white people and they just said well I really didn't want to go to work the next morning, particularly after Kinte's foot was chopped off because I was just so angry at all white people. Now that's something that the television people and the producers have always feared, that if you show the realities it'll just make Blacks so angry that it will intensify the conflict. On the other hand it may be that part of what was called the soap opera part of it namely in one scene where in Georgia the white overseer's wife was with the little Black child and she said well all white people don't think that. Some Black people are upset about that because they thought that was [CROSSTALK] patronizing. On the other hand from a standpoint of media effects, maybe that was the reason why they included something like that because, quite honestly, it's difficult to sit there and view program after program -- the hostilities and the abuses directed at Black people -- and not be angry at the people who are doing that abuse.

Florence Jackson 00:12:07.770
Well I feel that a first reaction is to be angry. Of course, I think that it should be a reaction that one would come up with. If you're not angry then something is wrong. It means that you have not been touched. You have not really sensed the impact of the material that's being presented to you. So I think it's positive that people were angry. But at the same time I think in presenting history in terms of the patronizing element -- what seemed to be patronizing as an element -- when you're presenting history for real truth, I think you have to present all sides of the picture. Some people... some whites may have said all whites are not like that, and other whites may have said something differently. Some Blacks may have had different attitudes toward slavery because maybe they were the preferred slave and therefore did not receive all the harshness as some other slaves did especially those slaves who worked in the fields. I mean there was a different treatment of those slaves and those who worked in the House who became almost an integral part of the family because they worked in the house. So I think in any presentation, we must have a sort of a balance to show that there were various things and ideas and feelings that were occurring at the same time. It's never you know a straight cut and dried, two sides of a situation. There are many facets which makes history become a sort of an art rather than a science.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:32.190
Well that does raise the question. Let's say you are involved in curriculum development at the Board of Education and the question is how will this program and this book result in changes in the curriculum. Is slavery treated now fairly -- by fairly I mean the abusive retrogressive nature of slavery is adequately treated? To what extent in dealing with the Civil War for example do we continue that lie that the Civil War was fought to free Blacks: that was a consequence, one consequence, but in terms of the causes of the Civil War where there was some moral issues about slavery, but basically it was an economic cause [CROSSTALK]. Now to what extent will ROOTS change, if any, the way in which social studies deal with Blacks -- particularly around slavery and reconstruction?

Florence Jackson 00:14:37.680
We do have in the curriculum already many aspects of slavery. We've tried to do this by using as many primary sources as possible: you know diaries, documents, other material...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:55.110
Slave narratives...

Florence Jackson 00:14:55.112
...right. We have those in the classroom so that youngsters can get almost through word of mouth exactly what slaves said about their treatment and how they felt about it. What actually happened to them. Things of that kind. But I think what ROOTS will do, will intensify and make us look at the total curriculum again and re-evaluate what we have in it and say, "Do we have enough?" That really gives a full picture. And when I talked about history being an art and many facets have we included the many different facets of that particular period so that youngsters will come out with a true understanding of what the slavery period and reconstruction period was like. Will they begin; will we or can we, actually, help youngsters begin to really look for truth which is what history should be all about looking for the truth? Will we give the youngsters the tools. We can't give them everything in the classroom, but can we develop within youngsters the curiosity and develop within them the tools that will help them do the research on their own? We would like them not only to say well we read this slave narrative in the classroom and we discussed it and that's that; we'd like them to go to the library and find some other slave narratives, or find some other diaries or documents and really delve into it intensely. I think it's wrong if we think that everything is going to be done in the classroom and that's it. My philosophy of education is that the classroom is only the beginning of education and that we must prepare the youngsters -- give them the clues about the topics that they should be looking into -- and give them the other skills that are necessary for evaluating and interpreting the materials that they will find out in the libraries, in the world, and the newspapers, etc., so that the curriculum in re-evaluating it will be looking toward: do we have enough clues within it that will help youngsters go out into the world and do this kind of search in terms of their own backgrounds or in terms of ethnic societies not only in the United States but around the world. I mean we have to branch out and not just stay within the United States entirely.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:09.470
Tonight on SOUL OF REASON we are talking with Florence Jackson, who's center director for the Center for Humanities and the Arts of New York City Board of Education. And we're talking about the impact of ROOTS on the curriculum. And one of the things that I want to ask you just before I interrupted you was the question of the book ROOTS itself. Will the book be a required part of reading? Or are we going to take excerpts -- because it's a long book and it's written at a fairly high reading level which means that some children might not be able to read it? How do you plan to treat that and then after you respond to that want to talk about the whole genealogy issue which a lot of people have become interested in.

Florence Jackson 00:17:54.620
Well first of all the book has come into our center it has been evaluated and has been processed for listing. That's step number one. So that all schools will know that this is the book that is available and that they can purchase. For some of the English classes that book will become one of the many texts that they will be reading and discussing. In the social studies classes we will probably be taking excerpts; and we've discussed this already, which excerpts might you want to include in a social studies lesson. So that at least on those two subject areas the book is on its way to the schools and in some schools already because some teachers are being a little bit more aggressive have brought in the material themselves.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:45.620
What about purchasing the film? I notice that the film is going to be available. I got across my desk, and noticed it says it's going to cost about $7,000. But obviously if you buy four or five or six or seven copies, since they're different episodes, the episodes could be made available to different schools. So do you plan to buy any copies of the film?

Florence Jackson 00:19:08.330
We have also already discussed this. And we have tried to come out with a way of breaking down the film into smaller portions because the way our classrooms and schools operate -- that's a 40 minute period -- and of course the series were either an hour or two hour of length. So we've already discussed how can we break down the series into smaller components. Now there's also been talk of possibly a course built around ROOTS itself, whereby the youngsters may see about a 20 or 25 minute portion of the series and then have a discussion time and have related readings to go along with those particular portions: that might be one way of doing it. Now that would become an elective course, though, that youngsters will choose by themselves to take. But in order to get it into the existing social studies curriculum the entire series is too long. So we were thinking of possibly portions of it which might be might be taken out and put into a 20 minute form that we can build a lesson around it and give the teacher suggested reading portions from the book itself which will elaborate upon that. Also [CROSSTALK]...[CROSSTALK]... raise though some serious copyright problems because at the university we got a warning from the network saying that we shouldn't even videotape it because it was a violation of the law and the rights to the film at certain length have been given to a particular company. So I imagine with the clout of the New York City Board of Education you might be able to get them to cut down the [garbled CROSSTALK]. Yes we've discussed that with them. I mean it's something that they have to agree to and there has been a meeting already. We've had a meeting already to discuss the possibilities of how it might be broken down; to be placed in the classrooms; and not only for the very successful reader in the classroom but also for youngsters who may have problems with reading. We've talked about the kinds of supplementary materials that may go along with those portions so that all youngsters can be able to participate in that particular lesson. It's it's not something that's going to happen overnight. I mean we have done the initial meeting with the producers and the developers of the book... publishers of the book... and they are willing to set up packages for the schools. So we would hope that this gets off the ground almost immediately and that we don't remain in the talking stage for a long time so that the materials can get into the classroom in a usable form for classroom situations.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:49.910
Now what about the interest... increased interest in genealogy that has been stimulated by this. I noticed a couple of the airlines are having promotions to take people to Europe and all over the world so they can explore "quote/unquote" their roots. The in word this year is "roots." What are you doing in the area of genealogy in your curriculum. Because genealogy really is very difficult. It sounds easy on one hand to go back find out where your grandparents came from; but beyond that -- and even up to that in some instances -- it is difficult. Plus where you may have families where there are illegitimate children, it might create some sensitivity about talking about genealogy and I know the schools have to be concerned with all of those issues.

Florence Jackson 00:22:38.030
Well one technique... well there are actually two techniques that we have already instituted in our programs, and ROOTS, I think, will help it. One is what we call the instant museum approach, whereby youngsters are asked to look around their own particular homes and talk with their parents and ask them for objects such as... maybe clothing, or a photograph, or a letter, or some bit of information which will tell that youngster about his or her particular family... give some insight into the family background. And what we have asked classes to do, is that youngsters would bring this material into class, and will discuss it with the rest of the students, and then they will set up in what we call an instant museum whereby they will select maybe a room or a section of the room where they will display this material with captions so that it's the first step in how does one do research to find out about your own family background.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:34.490
It seems to me I heard that instant museum idea when you were here with Bob Williams talking about the bicentennial.

Florence Jackson 00:23:40.070
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:40.680
And if that is what the bicentennial celebration has stimulated I say right on.

Florence Jackson 00:23:45.690
Yes it's still going on, and we're still backing it and saying this is the first step -- we can't stop there of course. There is a course given in one of the high schools --Madison High School -- on tracing family roots. And it seems to be very well subscribed, the kids are really going into it. That of course is a little bit more advanced and maybe not every class can do that particular type of research. But those are the two ways. There is a third way that we have been instituting and helping schools to develop and that's an oral history program, whereby it may not deal directly with their own particular family but youngsters can get a feel of the community that they live in by talking to elderly people in the community who have known it for a period of years and who can give them some insight into their own particular experiences, and give youngsters knowledge of how a community grew and developed and changed over a period of years. So we have some schools where they're working on oral history projects. Of course kids can do the same kind of thing with their parents. They can interview parents and get some pertinent information about family background. Of course along with all of that, the schools are responsible for helping the youngsters devise the skills. If you're going to do oral history you have to know how to interview a person. You have to know what questions you're going to ask. And it has to be in some organized form so that you get back a response that makes sense in your interview. So all of those preliminary steps are being taken in a variety of classrooms around the city to help youngsters develop the skills that are necessary for doing this kind of research.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:34.230
Now with the phenomenal success of ROOTS being shown every night for a week --and with the fact that people began to talk about it -- what's your opinion about the potential use of television in teaching history and helping people to really understand what is happening around them? Recently I saw ELEANOR AND FRANKLIN which I found to be very enlightening both for somebody who already knew the story but for someone who didn't. Is this what life was like in the depression and during the war? To what extent are these modern media techniques being used in the schools? Now maybe they don't have to be used because kids have television sets in their homes, I understand in this country there are more television sets in homes than there telephones. But to what extent is schools using some of these techniques?

Florence Jackson 00:26:30.560
Well as you know we have our own New York City Board of Education channel -- Channel 25 -- which unfortunately has been cut back tremendously by the budget cuts; but for years we have used this to bring programs into the classroom so that teachers and students can share the same experience at the same time and then develop a lesson, or a series of lessons, after, relating to whatever that particular television program was about. We not only use the "in the classroom television" but we use the regular programs that come over the air at certain times. We would inform teachers that a particular program will be available and many times there are teaching materials that go along with them we try to see that they get it before the program to prepare youngsters. So I see television as a vital force and even better than reading a book. Yes reading a book you do get some information, you get factual information, but I think when it's portrayed in the visual, where you're getting another sense into play, you're getting the sight and you're getting sound into play with the factual information, it becomes even more real. And I think more vital and this is what I think ROOTS did. It became really vital to the person looking at it. It wasn't just sitting down and reading it and making your own assumptions, you were really seeing it in full view.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:59.930
And I guess as a director of curriculum this is an exciting time and ROOTS does provide an excellent opportunity for us, both in the schools and in the community. Our guest on tonight's SOUL OF REASON has been Florence Jackson who's center director of the Center for Humanities and the Arts of the New York City Board of Education. And we've been talking about the impact of ROOTS on the schools in New York City.

Radio Bumper outro 00:28:24.951
You've been listening to SOUL OF REASON with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

