Speaker 1 00:00:02.150
The black community in New York City is going to be faced with a very interesting challenge. One of its own. The Honorable Percy Sutton borough president of Manhattan is going to be a candidate in the next mayoral election. Here Percy Sutton borough president of Manhattan discuss his plans and the opportunities for blacks in New York City. On Tonight soul of reason. This is Soul of reason. A program that will examine the roots of the black box.

Speaker 2 00:00:53.170
Soul of reason is produced by the NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 1 00:01:13.900
Our guest on tonight soul of reason is the honorable Percy Sutton borough president of Manhattan but to me just plain old Percy because we were buddies together in World War Two and did a lot of things.

Speaker 3 00:01:25.290
So glad to have you with us tonight. Glad you said we're at work.

Speaker 4 00:01:27.740
Two people look at me. They look at you and know that you were in World War Two. But look at me and my bald head. They must have been worthwhile. Why. Now that seen you and thank you for inviting me here is really really great.

Speaker 5 00:01:39.830
Firstly of course the audience should know that person I have known each other for many years and we've observed each other's careers is moving in the direction of politics and mind moving in the direction of education. And occasionally we do have an opportunity to come together on common ground. And one of the common grounds that all of us in the black community face is how we as black people are going to respond to our new political opportunities and to our new political responsibilities. I know personally that you were very active in the caucus of black Democrats very active in terms of the latest presidential campaign and Jimmy Carter was elected largely due to the way in which black people went to the polls particularly in the south. As Basil Paterson who was on our show recently said if it weren't for those votes from blacks in the south, the south that delivered Jimmy Carter really would not have delivered Jimmy Carter because 55 percent of the white vote went for Gerald Ford so that we are now seeing the fruits of the Voting Rights Act of 65 and black people are expecting things now. What do you think the impact of this new administration will be on black people in America? Great injury could be done to black people in America.

Speaker 6 00:02:54.460
This administration does not produce for them not all of our expectations because we as black people live in a white society and we have learned like white people who have learned that not everything that is promised to us will come our way. But because so many blacks came out and incidentally you mentioned Basil Patterson Basil Patterson is one of the great political leaders of America not just black like one would say he is just Irish just black just Jewish meaning that he or she was confined to that community and the expression of giant size. But Basil Paterson is one of the giant leaders in America is presently the vice chairperson of the Democratic National Committee. Though soon he will resign that position. Basil Paterson generated great interest among black political leaders not because he was a person for Jimmy Carter but because Jimmy Carter was a Democratic nominee and Basil Paterson as a leader activated us so that we criss cross this country for Jimmy Carter. Jimmy Carter made many promises. I remember being present in North Carolina when Jimmy Carter as a candidate when the question of the cabinet was discussed said if black people produce 25 percent of the Democratic vote in a Democratic primary for president then black people are entitled to have 25 percent of the cabinet. Now I recall hearing those words. Wow he said this but as we have seen the cabinet is selected we do not find blacks having any 25 percent. We say we see one black a very well qualified person whose name is Andrew Young former congressman being our representative to the United Nations. This is not the most powerful job in the world. It is a job where policy is decided by the State Department and the president and it is implemented but it is perhaps good that we have a person there. Andy Young is a moralist and the selection of Andy Young to have him effective then the president must have said that he is going to permit Andy Young to be a moralist if Andy Young is to be a moralist on the great issues having to do with the question of Africa then America is going to have to be supportive of the blacks in South Africa if it has to do with Rhodesia then America's had on a moralist base it is going to have to be far the majority. There are blacks to have their freedom in Rhodesia if it has to do with Namibia South-West Africa. Some people call it then America is going to have to be in the position of supporting Namibia and the blacks that are there. What I'm saying to you is that we've gotten that position and we've gotten it on the basis that Andy Young had a personal relationship to Jimmy Carter and Jimmy Carter made a decision that he wanted to have.

Speaker 7 00:05:50.490
Andy Young there and Andy Young is a moralist so we have to believe that Americans are going to assume a moralistic position that is not exactly the position America has taken in the United Nations and in world affairs in the past. We have not been great moralist. Then if we move from there we find that Jimmy Carter who enchanted many women and had them believing that they were going to share really share in this new cabinet of outsiders who were going to come into government. Well we've discovered that the only two women have been appointed to that cabinet. One of them is a woman who is going to be in commerce and the other person is a woman who happens to be black. Name is Patricia Harris who is going to be the director of housing secretary housing. Now we really had expected I think women had the right to expect more women in the cabinet all America had the right to expect more outsiders since really the thrust and the appeal of Carter was that change was going to take place new faces made effect. Hamilton Jordan he pronounces it Jordan but we spell it as J O R D.

Speaker 4 00:07:00.350
And how much did that role Atlanta pronunciation. Well I since I come from Texas I got a difficult Asian accent.

Speaker 6 00:07:08.140
In any event I remember Hamilton Jordan making the comment that if you find in the cabinet a Cyrus Vance a secretary of state if you find a Brzezinski as security adviser and then your namesake another person if you find them there then I ought to quit. He was saying that he ought to quit. Well we do find Vance as secretary of state. We do find Brzezinski as the adviser foreign affairs adviser Security Council rather adviser. We do find most of the faces to be old faces.

Speaker 7 00:07:44.440
It is a retread so that there's great disappointment I think for those who believed as I did that we would see many new faces. There's great disappointment for those who believe that many women were going to be in the cabinet as I did. There's great disappointment for those of us who believe that many blacks were going to be in the cabinet at idea. So one at a time when blacks in 1976 began to believe in the political system.

Speaker 8 00:08:13.180
And voted for Carter.

Speaker 6 00:08:14.680
We already find an alienation in the minds of many blacks because the first step taken by Carter did not demonstrate that he was going to keep his commitment. Now some people have said that blacks autumn moved to block the inaugural ought to be in the street.

Speaker 9 00:08:33.340.0000000000582
The black thinking as a whole as I perceive it from talking to people in Harlem where I live talking to a variety of people well let's see what he does with regard to the regulatory agencies now regulatory agencies as we all know agencies such as the Federal Communications Commission where there's one black who's now leaving who is now leaving at the end EPA head of the NAACP and we know that the federal regulatory agencies have great power.

Speaker 7 00:08:59.030
They're not the Supreme Court of the land but they do have great power. So there are many blacks who are saying and women who are saying let's wait and see. But one of the dangers of waiting and seeing and not protesting not making demonstrations when I say demonstrate you don't have to go in the street but massive meetings with the president and his representatives and you holding a media and addressing the media as they express your position. One of the dangers is that he may do the same thing with regard to regulatory agencies as he did with the cabinet and says wait further and see what I do for blacks Well what can he do for blacks after that if blacks are not and women are not in significant position in the cabinet on the regulatory agencies then they are going to be relegated to those two thousand patronage positions that are in government heading various civil rights units and et cetera where he can appoint in various stations in the federal government. Then all he can do is to have blacks and women benefit just as other people benefit.

Speaker 1 00:09:58.930
No special benefits will flow to them because he there's only so much he can do for them after that was the I share everything that you've said and as I go about the black community I find the same type of responses as matter of fact. Recently a reporter from one of the large national magazines called me at the university to find out what my attitude was was about the added the feeling of the black community in terms of the new administration. And I just said it was a kind of healthy skepticism and a great deal of disillusion. It's a good way of expressing it and the skepticism that is what I feel. That's what I think that like Amanda feels on the other hand addressing your profession namely the political process is not part of the political process in the United States of America. Establishing positions that develop a certain amount of response.

Speaker 3 00:10:51.900
I'm not talking about deviating from basic moral positions because I don't believe that Carter has taken a position positions that are immoral.

Speaker 7 00:10:59.400
I just think that he has not delivered literally what he said he was going to do. What you're really saying Dr. Brown is, don't politicians promise a lot more than they know they can produce. Exactly. I'm afraid that is historically true. It is a position that I have in my entire political career never made the mistake. Let me withdraw from that in my entire successful political career. I've never made the mistake of making and I the reason I had to withdraw that is because I really believed in the 11 years that I was either running for office myself or supporting Basil Patterson and supporting Charlie Rangel or George Miller and losing all of those elections. I really believe that Percy Sutton got elected to the assembly and they sent me to Albany. I could revolutionize the condition of blacks living in Harlem.

Speaker 4 00:11:48.720
I remember an in-joke between you and I for many years I would call you the perennial insurgent. I was a quote from let me drive and I continue to lose those and I really believe that I could make a difference.

Speaker 7 00:12:00.720
I promised them if but once I won and found I did not make that dramatic difference I didn't make any promises. And one of the things I think Mr. Carter may have done is he raised the hopes of women and blacks and as a matter of fact many of those who had heretofore been alienated labor and others eight years of alienation during the Nixon Ford administration.

Speaker 8 00:12:24.960
Now they had great hopes. Already some of those hopes have been shattered with regard to women and blacks and some Labor people with regard to the appointments made to the cabinet. The question is will the Carter administration will Mr. Carter in his further appointments to the regulatory agencies and to the various political jobs in government. Will he then continue to forget blacks and women to the extent that he would turn them off from further participation. I hope not because I am a local person. I want to be mayor of the city of New York and I have said that if blacks alone do for me in my bid for mayor what they did for Jimmy Carter in his bid for the presidency I with a strong support that I have in the White community of the state of New York can become mayor if they do not do for me that which they did for Mr. Carter. I cannot become mayor except by an unexpected turn out of the white community in support of me. This does not mean that I do not expect a large turnout from the white community but I must also be able to produce from the black community a large and unexpected turnout from other people's standards.

Speaker 3 00:13:37.740
Now what you really have articulated very well is this. I would call it political renaissance in the black community. The black community has. We have made our struggles through our black churches through our black social organizations the Elks and the various other fraternities and sororities that we have. They have been our centralizing force. I remember and talk with some people from the YMCA basically in the cities throughout this country. Butler Street in Atlanta Georgia 12th Street in Washington D.C. One hundred and thirty four Street Y in Harlem. These were the places where we made our decisions for our communities. When we were excluded from the political process right. The Voting Rights Act then the civil rights movement has thrust us full force into this process. And what happened in the Carter election tended to give us a sense of maturity and strength. And as you suggested and as I reflect from the black community a certain sense of unreality of what's going to happen tomorrow. But what you're really saying is that this new political renaissance is an opportunity for the black community to build structures that will not only contribute to improving our conditions but will contribute to our feeling better about ourselves. And because when you take your destiny in your own hands and do something about it yourself electing your person the person that you support the person who supports you you as a race as a people become more whole but just as we do that Dr. Roscoe Brown.

Speaker 7 00:15:15.630
The danger in it is if Mr. Mr. Carter haven't beaten Mr. Ford now shatters our illusion our illusion was that things were going to happen for black Americans things were going to happen for women. Things were going to happen for the labor movement. If this is now shattered further by inaction a failure of production by Carter the danger is that it will turn off many people from the process of registering voting they will not believe that the political process will pay dividends. That's one of the dangers.

Speaker 3 00:15:52.010
As a matter of fact when we have Basil Paterson on the show I raise the question as to whether this might not be a long hot summer. The summer of 77. If the Carter administration doesn't begin to get some money flowing into those communities where we have 50 and 60 and 70 percent unemployment among teenagers.

Speaker 9 00:16:12.440
I recently in that regard I taped a CBS television. Hope you don't mind me mentioning Steve color. That's the media with Gloria Steinem the feminist and editor of Men's Magazine. Bill Safire who is with the New York Times a columnist used to be with Nixon and Bill consular.

Speaker 8 00:16:31.640
The radical lawyer and one of the issues I raised at that time was that what I was afraid of was that Mr. Carter had raised expectations so high that he cannot do what Mr. Nixon did. Poor people blacks women had no high expectations from Mr. Nixon. So when Mr. Nixon didn't do anything there was not there was a calm. It's a matter fact almost a fear and a feeling sorry for oneself. But if Mr. Carter fails to do something I think you're going to find a lot of agitated people and black people and women have been patient for a very long time. It's a matter of fact some people think they've been too patient. But this patients can wear out and if you recall and I don't want to make this too long. But if you recall when Mr Johnson was president Mr Johnson had done much in his Great Society. But the Vietnam thing caught him and the students rebelled against him. People went into the streets against him. Mr. Nixon then became president and they killed some students at Kent State. And I remember talking to a group of students at Williams College in Massachusetts immediately thereafter. I said we have seen the death of the student movement with the killing of those youngsters at Kent State because what the guns of those National Guardsmen has done is silence students because students will not continue to go into the street. Liberal Johnson who didn't suppress them they rebelled against because they had high expectations that Johnson was going to do something they expected nothing from Nixon and they were intimidated by him. So Nixon intimidated them. Following Johnson and now they're eight years of Nixon and Ford their expectations again and not going to be intimidated by Mr. Carter. And if Mr. Carter failed to produce I think you're going to have gross injustice by Mr. Carter. But Gross conflict from the people who were disappointed.

Speaker 1 00:18:36.260
We're talking this evening with the honorable Percy Sutton who's a borough president of Manhattan. He was about to say of New York but wants to be Manhattan is technically New York County who is a mayoral aspirant. And we've been talking about the impact of the new administration of Carter administration on the black community. Let us turn now to New York City and to Percy Sutton mayoral aspirant.

Speaker 5 00:18:59.930
We know for a good period of time have been rumors that you plan to run for mayor. Recently Basil Paterson on the show and various aspects of the press have indicated that you have communicated to Mayor Abraham Beame that you do plan to become a candidate.

Speaker 1 00:19:19.310
Could you tell us something about that what your plans are and how you plan to be successful.

Speaker 9 00:19:24.920
Certainly first I'd like to explain to your audience why I decide to run I think many persons who may be listening to this have over a period of five years or so said to me why don't you run for mayor. And I remember some friends who were in this studio who asked me why I didn't run for mayor some four odd years ago and my answer was at that time the reason I didn't run for mayor was that I thought that I was not electable. At that time the reason is I had done polls and that was not that sense of spirit within the various communities and neighborhoods in this city that would have permitted me to win.

Speaker 7 00:20:00.770
And I had a great burden. I was the only black elected official in high position in city government and it is necessary in a city like this to have persons who come from a particular background. This city is not the melting pot that we think of it as this city is a variety of communities of different people from different national origins different religions different ethnic groups who have accommodated themselves to the other. And historically this city has had people from the various groups in position of high power. That is what really has kept this city together. It doesn't mean that you are from a group you only represent that group because I think that in my tenure as president the burden Manhattan if anything I have established is then while Percy Sutton is black and I am everyday in the week Percy Sutton has not just been the representative of black people but has seen it as his duty and he's performed well of bringing other people together and representing all interests whatever color whatever national origin whatever geographic area one lives in. Now having done that for a number of years and having been goaded almost by some who say wait a minute you're as well qualified and is as anyone else and perhaps better qualified than others who have run for mayor. Why don't you do it. I elected not to run when I thought I didn't have the chance to win because I would then be removed from office and I would not be able to have that kind of I don't want to use the term input but certainly production of my point of view as a part of city government. Now I then said after supporting a being when he ran four years ago I then said I would not run if a beam was going to run. I said that frankly because of two reasons one I did not want a black Jewish confrontation. The two largest minorities here are the blacks and the Jews. I did not want to see them in mortal combat. In saying this however I have discovered that it would not be if Percy Sutton decides to run now and may have been decides to run again. I hope he does not. But should he decide to run for re-election. There are already persons from the Jewish community who have challenged him so I don't see it as a direct confrontation. Bella Abzug may come in and Andy Stein has already indicated his intention running for it catch Ed Koch and so there would not be the black. Now the other part of it was I never really thought that Mel being when I supported him was going to run for a second term. His age was such that I didn't believe it. He never told me he was not going to run I as you may remember I did the position I got the people together do the position papers for him. I was one of those who sat with him and planned his campaign before he decided to run. He was then the controller and I believed in a man. I still do he's a very decent. He's kind of been a fine human being and none of the problems let me quickly say as I told Mayor being at breakfast the other morning when I took him I was going to run. I said Abe I will not run an anti a being campaign because you are a fine and decent human being. You're gonna run a pro and I will run a pro New York Pro Percy Sutton upbeat campaign not an anti I'll leave that to other people because that's not my nature and he is too decent a human being for me to attack him. Now I decide to run because a being had not decided what he was going to do and I could not be continually embarrassed by people saying to me What are you waiting for. Other people are announcing they're starting their campaign treasure chest. They're getting the people together who are going to work with them. So I had to make the decision. So I thought in making it I ought to go to the very person that I had been with ABM and say to him Abe I can no longer be considered the tail on the kite. I have to fly myself and I am going to run and I'm going to run.

Speaker 8 00:24:08.330
I said I wouldn't run if you were going to run but you have not made a decision and I can no longer wait to wait is to be castrated. He understood. We shook hands and I saw him later that afternoon. The relationship was present pleasant and I don't think we're going to be in mortal combat with each other.

Speaker 10 00:24:26.450
Well I think that the New York City in general has responded very favorably to the fact that you as well as other candidates have announced early on that you are going to be active in pursuing the position of mayor of New York City and that all of you are committed to New York City in your particular case because you are from the black community. As I said it does represent a kind of fruition of black political activity which leads me to ask the question now is how do you plan to mobilize not only the black community but also some segments of the white community to support your candidacy.

Speaker 7 00:25:06.770
The most delightful thing that could have happened to me has already happened. As I said for a long number of years people had been saying to me why don't you run. I've had people write letters to me and say if you run I want to support you. This has been going on for five years or more. The minute I mention it it was my intention to run more than 10 days ago when I mentioned it. I began getting telephone calls and now someone says Percy Sutton is black and Percy Sutton is black. Maybe the peep calls would come only from blacks. Not at all. A large segment of the white community and the various neighborhoods people have sent in in three by five cards with their names and addresses and telephone numbers on them calling upon me to run offering to gather petitions to hold organizing efforts in their various communities. It has been absolutely astounding not only that members of the business community in this city have come forward and identified with me when I actually announce immediately following the presidential inaugural and the reason I don't do it before then some good deal of planning is necessary and also I don't want to get my own announcement confused with Mr. President Carter's coming into office. I now plan to announce it on the 24th or the 25th that's on a Monday or Tuesday. We may put it off a day or two if we find that the papers are covering only Mr. Carter at that time because we need a lot of publicity. But I am running because I think I can do something for this city. I'm not running as an exercise in futility. This city needs strong leadership. This needs city needs excited leadership. There are a number of issues that we have to deal with some of them are going to trouble people especially Percy Sutton deals with them. Joblessness is a very large issue in this city. Education is a large issue. Crime is a large issue and how to deal with the issue of crime. How do you get jobs to come back if people are frightened? If people cannot in the ghetto communities go out on the street at night can't go to their churches. How do you get them to stay in this city. I'm not talking about white people. I'm talking about black people. Six out of 10 blacks that we have surveyed think that the most important thing is crime. Only five out of 10 whites think it. These are some of the issues that have to be dealt with. I'm prepared to deal with them. I'm reaching out for everyone who can help me. My campaign will be not with the support of the Democratic Party bosses not with the support of even the reform movement maybe but with the support of the people who live in the various communities of this city.

Speaker 10 00:27:51.050
See I remember Percy Sutton walking down Pennsylvania Avenue on August 28 1963 at the March on Washington. I also remember Percy Sutton marching in those anti Vietnam War protest movements and I believe at Percy Sutton will do this. Now is your job now to mobilize and get a lot of other people to help you do it.

Speaker 7 00:28:12.220
Yes I've said that if I can get as many blacks to work with me as work with Jimmy Carter I can be mayor because whites will work with me as well.

Speaker 10 00:28:20.560
Our guest on tonight sole reason has been the honorable Percy Sutton a borough president of Manhattan and Merrill aspirin and we've been talking about the role of blacks in politics nationally and the opportunity that his proposed candidacy will provide for the black community to show its political maturity. Thanks again Percy for being our guest on tonight solar reason. Nice being with you Lieutenant.

Speaker 11 00:28:42.190
Captain Roscoe Brown You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:29:00.520
Soul of reason is produced by the NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

