Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:00:01.800
There are no more than 2000 black dentists in the United States. What is being done to train more black men and women to deal with the dental problems of the black community? Here, Dr. Lawrie Suggs of NYU College of Dentistry discuss this important issue on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Narrator 00:00:38.831
This is Soul of Reason, a program that will examine the roots of the black box. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:01:06.760
Our guest on the tonight's Soul of Reason is Dr. Dolores Suggs who is assistant to the dean for student affairs at the NYU College of Dentistry. And we are talking about this important problem of the need for more black dentists to deal with dental problems of not only the black community but the world at large. Glad to have you with us tonight Dolores.

Dolores Suggs 00:01:25.661
Glad to be here.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:01:26.921
Now to begin with, how many black dentists are there out of the total number of dentists in the country and then of those black dentists, how many of them are women.

Dolores Suggs 00:01:38.982
In the country today, we have about a hundred and twenty five thousand dentists who are in practice and approximately 2 thousand of them are black dentists. About 1 percent of the total dentist population is comprised of female dentists. And I would guess that a larger percentage of the black population of dentist is female than the general population of dentists.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:02:05.980
Is that right?

Dolores Suggs 00:02:06.740
Yes that's right.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:02:07.851
It might be as many as a hundred and fifty black women dentists in the country.

Dolores Suggs 00:02:12.220
I really can't give you numbers on that but the black dental schools have been less discriminatory toward women throughout the year so that there are proportionately more women dentists who are black than white women dentist who are black

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:02:27.791
Well getting into the need for more dentists generally and more black dentists. What really is the nature of the dental problem in the black community? It's been said that everyone has to go to the dentist at least once or twice a year or should. It's also been said at least until very recently that half of the population over 50 years old didn't have their own teeth until fairly recently and in the black community this was pretty rough as well. What really is the problem? What is the wha-why do we need more dentists? Why do we need more black dentists?

Dolores Suggs 00:03:00.730
That's a major question now among dental educators and dentists-public health dentists. And the question has been debated back and forth and I believe now the general feeling is that we have a problem of maldistribution rather than a problem of a shortage of dentists in the country. If we estimate dental demand which now is at a level where about 49 percent of the population visits the dentists regularly each year, then we have enough dentists. If we look at dental need which is different from demand which is what is really out there, then we would need more dentists and dental need is higher in the black population because this population has not been treated regularly in the past. We have a backlog of needs in the black population so that our older members of the population are in need of dentures and major major work.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:04:07.632
Because we have sort of three kinds of problems in dental field. We have a problem with young children and they they will lose their teeth to be replaced by a permanent teeth. It is still a problem there. Every other problem of dental caries and then we have the problem in the older population of loss of teeth and periodontal or gum disease. Now each one of these things is sort of broken up into specialties in dentistry. Are there many dentist-black dentist who specialize or most of them what you might call general practitioners?

Dolores Suggs 00:04:38.891
About 10 percent of black dentists are specialist about 15 percent of all dentists are specialists so we do have fewer specialists. The distribution of specialists also is different among the black dentist population. We have more oral surgeons treating extractions treatment like that and prostate Onyx, making replacements for those teeth that then have been extracted. The overall dental population has more orthodontist who will be working on the cosmetic aspects of dentistry and that's the thrill. That's the extra part that the black population right now can't afford and doesn't need. They need more basic service.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:05:31.611
That's right. This cosmetic thing is important in part orthodontic straightening teeth. If you have poor bite which might affect you but much of what's done has to do with making you look better and whereas that's important for the black community. I think the other points that you made are really more more significant now. Do black people have more dental caries than white people? Do they have more dental problems basically? Or is it something is more economically related?

Dolores Suggs 00:06:01.270
Now that topic has been studied quite a bit. And even though blacks pre-school age children do not have any more caries than white pre-school age populations, we have more dental problems in the later years.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:06:21.190
Why is that? I know I'm asking a science. Well I don't care if I live or die. But sometimes when something like that comes up, just a general reaction to well why are blacks different than whites in certain ways? Is it because we are genetically different? Is it because our diet is different? Because there are cultures in Africa where people-black people don't have any caries.

Dolores Suggs 00:06:41.980
It's related to health care practices in the home. What you really do for prevention.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:06:51.791
What are some of those?

Dolores Suggs 00:06:52.991
We talk-I'm talking basically about brushing and flossing.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:06:57.410
Now white people don't even know what flossing is because that's something that was with us for a while and then it wasn't emphasized too much. Now it's emphasized more. Would you tell the audience a little about the relationship between brushing and flossing and why flossing is so important?

Dolores Suggs 00:07:14.380
Flossing is important to clean between your teeth and to get-to remove debris from around the bottom third of your tooth. And right at the gum line. This is the debris which irritates your gums and can cause a condition called periodontal disease. So you would need the flossing to remove that debris. Tooth brushing cannot and cannot do that.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:07:43.060
So when you get up in the morning you scrub across your teeth, that really is inadequate. You really should take dental floss or this-

Dolores Suggs 00:07:50.051
At least once a day.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:07:51.831
I say that's a pretty rough thing particularly for busy people. Is there any alternative, any substitute?

Dolores Suggs 00:07:56.381
There is no alternative at this time.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:07:58.810
As a dentist and a dental health educator you are really urging that this be done and that of course relates to something a dentist should do. I don't know whether they do it enough, when you go to their office, do most dentists now do a lot of dental health or is black dentists so busy that they don't have much chance to do dental health education.

Dolores Suggs 00:08:20.380
One problem another problem that the dental profession faces is a shortage of auxiliary personnel. Usually the dental hygienist who is the auxiliary personnel who will clean your teeth and give you health education is she's a very high paid individual and she's at a shortage too.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:08:40.870
I know because one of my responsibilities at New York University at one time was to coordinate the program for dental hygiene as we went to dental health educators, and for a long period of time, there was a number of dental hygienists working in the schools. But then as the school budgets got tight, the hygienists were cut as sort of a frill, which relates to society's attitude in general toward dentistry. Well do you say that our society has a positive, a negative, or neutral attitude toward dentistry?

Dolores Suggs 00:09:11.351
Dentistry, at least among the black population has a very low priority. There are other needs right now that are a lot more essential.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:09:22.861
Are they essential or perceived to be more essential?

Dolores Suggs 00:09:24.582
They are at this point, for some people, they are more essential. I believe we should try to reach a basic level of Oral Health which where you can function properly and not have all of the other kinds of treatment.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:09:45.202
So Health and social problems that you face. Now let me ask this. You're a black woman. You're a dentist, you're working in a dental college. What attracted you to the field of dentistry? Because we're gonna talk a little later about how we need more black dentists and how to get them. But specifically what attracted the Dolores Suggs to the field of dentistry?

Dolores Suggs 00:10:06.170
I was attracted to the field primarily by conversations with dentists and with mainly with relatives who are dentists.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:10:14.031
Oh you come from a dental family.

Dolores Suggs 00:10:16.011
And that is a trend generally in dentistry. Most people who go into dentistry know someone who is a dentist and get a feeling for the profession before they go into it.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:10:26.360
That is one of the problems that dental professionals face because in many ways it's it's somewhat like a craft you pay it on a piecework basis. You work in one place, you work very well with your hands and the like. And one of the things that many dental organizations are trying to do is to point up that you know there are opportunities in dentistry for other than members of families, other than people who just want to be individual entrepreneurs because dentistry is probably one of the last of the basic entrepreneurial professions and in most dentist practice individually. You don't practice practice in institutions. Is that right?

Dolores Suggs 00:11:05.750
That is correct. However a larger proportion of black dentists do practice in institutions than white dentists and vets in public health institutions.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:11:15.260
And it's really interesting, part of that might be due to the fact that since there is a need for public health dentists, many of the white dentists don't feel that they can take the salaries which probably aren't quite as good, or is it really because black dentists are more altruistic...if that's the case. Rather let us talk about what's being done let's not only talk about NYU but all of the country to attract more black young men and women into dentistry as a profession.

Dolores Suggs 00:11:51.201
Since 1968 I'd say, many schools have established recruitment programs and are actively seeking black dentists, black applicants to become dentists. However since the early 70s now, it seems as though more women are being sought than blacks and in many cases the classes are filled with women who are then called minorities.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:12:24.550
All right well, if a student wanted to get into NYU dental school, what would they do very briefly? A black student.

Dolores Suggs 00:12:31.401
He would call the office of admissions, request an application form.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:12:38.441
What is the telephone number of the Office of emissions at NYU?

Dolores Suggs 00:12:42.800
5 9 8 7 0 5 5.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:12:45.121
Alright, 5 9 8 7 0 5 5. Is that correct? All right. I think that's really very important. What else might they need? What are some of the basic requirements they need? Very briefly.

Dolores Suggs 00:12:55.670
Now they would need one year of biology in college, a year of general chemistry, a year of organic chemistry, a year of physics. They would have to take the dental aptitude test during the-during their senior year most likely, and get very good scores on that examination.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:13:18.351
And there is some finance, specifically earmark financial aid at New York University and other dental schools for minority students, are they not?

Dolores Suggs 00:13:26.811
That's one thing to look for when applying to dental schools for financial support and a commitment from the school to help you once you get to the school.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:13:35.820
Yeah I think the presence of Dolores Suggs at New York University's College of Dentistry and your own personal commitment shows that there is an opportunity for black young men and women who want to go into the field of dentistry. Well after a student gets this far, understands what is requirements are and begins to apply for financial aid, and we'll talk about some of the sources and in a moment, how does it go about choosing a college? I mean how do you-what kind of decisions are made and how does he go about that? Should a black student try to go to a black college like Howard and Harry or should he go to a predominantly white college? Are there more opportunities in the black colleges than white colleges? What about some of those things?

Dolores Suggs 00:14:19.701
I believe that the black student should apply to as many colleges as he can and not feel as though he might not be qualified for college. Go on and apply if they're interested in you, they'll contact you, have you come in for an interview. And at that time you'll be able to decide if you want that school yourself. When you're there to interview, be sure-be sure to speak to someone if you can in a specialty area that you might be interested in, if you're interested in a specialty. Be sure to ask for a tour of the school to see what kind of facilities they have available for you. What kind of backup they have, if they have tutoring if you run into difficulty, if they have audio visual aids available for you. How adequate the library facilities are there. Take a look at the laboratories. Take a look at the opportunities and take a look at the students who were there and if you can, speak to some of the students and see how they feel about school.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:15:22.220
All right now that's quite an order. You know a young person applies to five different dental schools all over the countryside. Are you suggesting that he should just go to all of them and he applies to or just only go to the ones where he's invited for an interview?

Dolores Suggs 00:15:36.201
He will. He can really only go if he's invited and get the kind of treatment that I'm talking about. And if they're interested in you they will ask you to come in for an interview.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:15:47.721
Well what kind of back-

Dolores Suggs 00:15:48.641
However, Howard University does not require interviews. You might want to just go and you won't have an interview there.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:15:55.190
What kind of academic average is required from college work in order to get into the average Dental School?

Dolores Suggs 00:16:04.641
A high C or B average would be required.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:16:09.861
That's the minimum.

Dolores Suggs 00:16:10.740
That is the very minimum requirement.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:16:13.221
Based on a couple of career workshops that we've had at the institute, it's been pointed out that many dental schools tend to look for students who have relatively high average and relatively high latitude scores, but many minority students don't have averages that are that high. And that's the reason why there are some special programs with the tutoring and a special assistance etc. What about that situation at NYU for example?

Dolores Suggs 00:16:38.391
Some schools, and NYU is included in this, look at your performance throughout the years and if you've shown improvement, if your average is getting higher as you go along through college, then you have a better chance for admissions.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:16:53.301
How important are the science courses? Are the science courses very important or the average important to being a dentist? What about that?

Dolores Suggs 00:17:02.870
Well that varies from school to school. At NYU, I would I believe your grades are more important than your dental aptitude test score, which is an exam that you can take during your senior year in college and it will cover basic science courses and will also have a section which will try to estimate your manual dexterity. It is a visual test but it's going to try to estimate your manual dexterity.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:17:31.670
Now one suggestion that some people have said is that the perceptual motor test, the dexterity test, isn't quite as important because you can learn some of these skills through-through practice and as a matter of fact, I heard one inority student just say that last week that whereas you know he had a fair score actually turned out to be a very fine dentist because he was able to practice. Now to what extent is manual dexterity an extremely important part of being eligible for dental school?

Dolores Suggs 00:18:05.730
Well studies released by the American Dental Association have shown that at some schools there is little correlation between a student's score on the perceptual motor section of the D.A.T. test and his performance in clinical dental courses so that if you have a low score there, you should be concerned about it but don't let it prevent you from applying to school-to the dental schools.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:18:33.311
All right now, when a student finally gets his offer of admission and he begins to search around for financial aid, what are some of the sources-that specific sources that he might look for or she might look for? I know that many schools have their own aid programs such as you have at New York University. But what are some other sources? Are there some sources for funding dental education outside of the individual school budgets and how does the student go about getting into those?

Dolores Suggs 00:19:04.790
Generally speaking, there are two major loan sources: one on the federal level and another on the state level, and the maximums for these loans are each twenty five hundred dollars so that you could borrow up to five thousand dollars from the government each year. At most institutions that would be an adequate amount of loans.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:19:27.900
Are there any direct grants? I know in medicine, there's a national medical fellowship program which supports about two thirds of all black medical students in the first year ,and those are outright grants averaging somewhere around 17 to 18 hundred dollars. Is there any such program for black dentist?

Dolores Suggs 00:19:52.600
Financial aid scholarship money is limited. I can only say that you have to be prepared to go into debt if you cannot afford a dental education. The dental educat-the cost of dental education is rising at some schools, it's as low as two thousand dollars a year for tuition at a state school. But at a private school, we're talking about upwards of eight thousand dollars a-for the first year when you include tuition, instruments, and living expenses. Dental school is more expensive than medical school.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:20:31.120
Of course what this really tells me is that dentistry is becoming a more exclusive profession and in some ways, it is not particularly responsive to the needs of the minority community. Now to what extent is the dental profession aware of this? Do they really want to keep black people out of the dental profession? To what extent is the black community aware of this? I think that really is a crying shame to see a situation like that. The cost is escalating and the financial aid is going down. This really doesn't make a lot of sense.

Dolores Suggs 00:20:58.930
Well one thing that might be done about it in the near future, federal loans might be tied with a commitment for early graduates to practice in shortage areas. So this would directly help the inner cities and the rural areas. If dentists are required to practice in these areas, however there's quite a bit of resistance of course from the students.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:21:25.500
From the students?

Dolores Suggs 00:21:26.150
Yes. It will really only affect the students, it won't affect the practitioners who are already.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:21:31.961
Oh I see. I was thinking that the supply and demand question comes into play that the dental profession just doesn't want more more dentists around. That isn't the question. The question is that the students who are in dental school don't want to go to the high density areas. They just relate to something outside said about the profession that is sort of the last bastion of underpaid individual entrepreneurism among craftsmen. Now that's a sort of a pejorative statement but what you just described sort of reinforces that you've got to have money to get into it and apparently they're not really opening up any easy way for people who don't have a lot of money to get the field of dentistry. I think that's something the minority dental caucus or the National Dental Association really ought to be devoting its attention to because certainly the black population is going to be the one that is hurt by this. Well let me ask this question. Are any recent dental graduates, black dental graduates involved in political and social and other activities to improve dental service for minority populations?

Dolores Suggs 00:22:38.290
More black dentists practice in public health agency type programs proportionately than white dentists. So then there is a commitment there among black practitioners to serve the black population. Most patients are black. Dentists are black.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:23:01.750
Yeah but still it is the sort of paying property. I was thinking of things like group practices and things like advocating some type of local or state or national dental insurance, various things that might affect large numbers of poor people. Dental profession to my knowledge has not been particularly in the forefront of searching out these kind of things. Now maybe I'm wrong.

Dolores Suggs 00:23:26.470
The National Dental Association has several policies which support distributing dental manpower throughout the country. One of their policies statements deals with licensure. Currently dentists must receive a license from each state. The National Dental Association supports a waiver of this so that you could practice in any state. My feeling is that dental manpower, that there is a distribution-maldistribution problem with dental manpower and all efforts must be aimed at correcting this. Whatever it takes.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:24:09.420
Yeah I think this is true in a number of professions. As I said recently we had a career in graduate study workshop at New York University sponsored by the Institute of Afro-American affairs and it was pointed up at the states of New York, California, and Florida, the so-called most desirable states are the ones that are most resistant to any type of national board licensing in the field of medicine. And I would surmise that that is probably the same basic pattern that you find in dentistry. These are areas that have a fairly affluent population at least California Florida. Good well and New York of course, is the world capital and that's where people want to practice so that when we talk about concentration you can see why dentists want to concentrate in that particular area. But there are other things even in these areas that can be done to improve the quality of dental service. For example, if we had some type of dental insurance or some type of group practice, I would think that minority people particularly those who are in unions where they have plans of various types, might get better service. And then there's another area that you talked about before the program, and that has to do with getting more black men and women in the field of dental hygiene and those ancillary fields where there's some better income than just being an average assistant, and also where they might provide a variety of dental health education services. So could you tell us a little something about opportunities in the field of dental hygiene and the difference between the hygienists and the assistant and the other ancillaries?

Dolores Suggs 00:25:47.920
There are some dental hygiene programs available, one at Columbia University that grants a baccalaureate degree, and I would suggest that qualified high school graduates apply to some of these programs. Many dental assistants find once they're out practicing that they would like to go back and get into hygiene school, but they find out then that it's too late because they don't have basic science courses that they should have taken in high school. So for-

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:26:22.331
What is a dental assistant has differentiate from dental hygienist? I happen to be aware of this but maybe some folks in the audience aren't. Could you give us the-

Dolores Suggs 00:26:30.701
The dental hygienist is a licensed individual who is trained in cleaning the teeth and in health education, and can work in a chair on her own under the supervision of a dentist.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:26:48.491
And what does she do at this chair?

Dolores Suggs 00:26:50.921
Basic cleaning of the teeth and health education. In California, I believe dental hygienist can have their own offices so that the trend is toward giving more responsibilities to hygienist.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:27:08.711
But in the case of an assis-

Dolores Suggs 00:27:10.181
The assistant is basically...the assistant basically assist the dentists at the chair side with the patient in the handling of instruments and in the management of the office. She has no direct responsibilities with the patient.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:27:27.520
Well in other words you and pointed up that there are a number of opportunities for men and women in the field of dentistry both as dentists and as dental ancillaries. I guess done tonight's Soul of Reason has been Dr. Dolores Suggs who is assistant to the dean for student affairs at The New York University College of Dentistry and we've been talking about the need for more black dental personnel both as dentist and as dental hygienist. Thanks again for being our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason.

