Speaker 1 00:00:01.440
The YMCA is one of the serving agencies now experiencing changes in their inner city constituencies. There are presently 127 YMCA is in the predominantly black communities of this country. Hear how the YMCA is attempting to meet the needs of their constituents in these communities. From Jesse Alexander and Fred Hill who will discuss these issues on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:45.730
This is Soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 1 00:01:13.330
With us this evening on soul of reason Jesse Alexander and Fred Hill will discuss the adaptation of the YMCA to changes in the inner city community. Firstly Jesse could you tell us exactly how many predominantly black YMCA is they are and what is the history and the evolution of the way in which these came about.

Speaker 3 00:01:36.820
Yes. Roscoe they are now about. They are one hundred and twenty seven YMCA days and predominantly black communities. I think that many people would be interested to know that the first YMCA was founded in this country in 1853 in a black community by a black man named ath and a boy. Now does that mean that the YMCA movement actually was started by a black man in a black community. No it was actually started in this country by whites but this Anthony Boyne knew or he and a white man worked together in a post office and this other white man was active in the YMCA. And so Anthony buoyant always a good idea for blacks and that's how the first YMCA started. Course you know in those days I was mostly Bible study and and reading rooms.

Speaker 4 00:02:38.620
Now what is your responsibility with the why and how do you get into relating the Y to the black community particularly in these days when it's suggested that all social agencies should be totally integrated.

Speaker 3 00:02:56.170
Yes. Roscoe I am the director of Human Rights for the National Board of YMCA of the United States. My responsibility is not only affirmative action but I have another major responsibility to help those YMCA or in black communities develop new programs and new thrust for the future. You know it's a real realism as far as the YMCA is concerned that the YMCA is in black communities have always had a special role and will continue to have in the future. And we are sure that we've integrated and all YMCA is open to all people but those YMCA is in a middle of a black community they obviously have almost all black constituents.

Speaker 4 00:03:48.430
The question what you might call de facto segregation versus Missouri Segregation Now it is true that throughout the nation YMCA is where previously racially segregated in those areas where racial segregation was in fact legal. And as the Brown case decision which was a forerunner of all desegregation decisions came in 1954 the YMCA like so many social agencies went through some real struggles in their southern and border communities to deal with the changes that racial integration brought about. Then as the central cities became more and more black and Hispanic and poor many of the so-called downtown branches of YMCA began to either close or do change their programs to serve only the commuting businessmen which I imagine has brought some significant problems to the black YMCA is now also with us tonight as Fred Hill of the black affairs center who is working with the Y as a consultant to you and to the human rights division and the concerned black workers to see what can be done in terms of orienting staff and community people to these changes. So Fred could you briefly tell us what you are doing and how you conceive of the wise new thrust or let's not call it new thrust to try to adapt to these changes in the inner city.

Speaker 5 00:05:32.450
Yeah I guess in many ways the the emphasis on newness and change has to be somewhat tempered with the notion which Jesse alluded to and he indicated that the YMCA and predominately black communities has been in existence since the mid 19th century.

Speaker 6 00:05:53.720
And what we're attempting to do is to develop new programs programs that are to use a word that's been used too often maybe more relevant. I knew you were going to use that word to the new constituency that they have to serve however rather than just accent and emphasize newness. We're trying to build on that historical foundation and the basis of these institutions. And part of my responsibilities along with Jesse as a consultant to this project is to do a historical kind of search working with people in those communities who've lived in them for a long period of time and have been associated with the YMCA to identify what kind of strengths were present when these wise were created. What was the character of the board. What was the character of the staff. Was it the sense of community and sense of ownership that people had in coming together and putting on a getting together and putting on a venture of this sort.

Speaker 4 00:07:05.870
Well speaking of that it's certainly well known to many black residents that YMCA is like the boat the Street YMCA in Atlanta and like the Harlem YMCA in New York City the Pine Street YMCA in St.. LEWIS The 12th Street branch in Washington D.C. were places for a considerable amount of black social and intellectual life. It's almost as though in many of these communities between the churches and segregated colleges and the YMCA is and possibly the fraternities and sororities you had almost the totality of black social and intellectual life and of course as integration has become at least more possible legally and sometimes practically. Many of the black leaders who were active in these organizations have now moved out into organizations which are integrated and sometimes predominately white leaving ofttimes a void in the black organizations for this type of leadership.

Speaker 7 00:08:10.160
So the question then comes is firstly what is the responsibility of the Y itself as a social agency. And secondly what is the responsibility of the. And the reaction of the citizens in the black community to these changes that are taking place. In other words do they really want the wise to continue in their communities. Do they really want to have control of these wise or as these agencies become integrated and have central board citywide. Do they want to fit into the integrated mix so let's begin with the first question what responsibility. And I'll ask Jesse to respond to this. What is the responsibility of the Y.

Speaker 8 00:08:52.670
How does a y as a national organization perceive its responsibility to these black YMCA as well.

Speaker 9 00:09:02.510
Roscoe when you consider that the budgets for 1974 the combined budgets of these YMCA is exceeded 16 million dollars that we have a professional staff. I mean the top full time staff I'm not talking about the whole army. Part time people and whatever of people who are not classified as professionals but we have 400 professionals. We we we have a constituency and duplicate account of close to a hundred thousand. You see the potential that we have for service that while we are you see what we do what we do have going on and the potential of what we have which far exceeds what was in the past and the National YMCA feels that this is a great resource is one of the largest resources we have in the country as for black communities and we feel we have to do everything we can to develop that.

Speaker 8 00:10:06.440
Now what about the allegation that the YMCA is passé that it raises suggest it was formerly a Bible reading organization an organization that dealt with the more established values and that was mainly a gymnasium or a physical fitness organization and now there are so many other organizations that are dealing with these as society becomes more polarized. There really isn't that much need for it. Also many wise where I live in places and now that people tend to live on their own. I know the YWCA is going through the same type of problems they've been closing down their residents facilities and in some of the why M.S. AIDS has been happening so how do you respond to the question of the viability the need for YMCA today.

Speaker 9 00:10:57.900
Well I would I would feel that the need for the Y is very very apparent when you look at the situation of the what's happened with the integrated schools as we call them the young men today do not have the support that they need now that the Y has been experimenting with tutoring and developing educational supplementary kinds of programs because we have a whole generation of people now who are black folks who've grown up without and with very little knowledge of the history and as. And these YMCA used to do that they used to provide history. Also the key leaders some of the key leaders who now are key politicians and what have you all grew up in the YMCA and they really haven't left the way we find and we asked him for something very specific they are provided.

Speaker 8 00:12:00.140
Of course this gets into this question of changes changes in program. You said earlier in the program that social agencies serving agencies are fighting for survival in the inner city. Many of them have tremendous financial resources and whereas things are always tight I assume the Y is one of the more affluent social serving agencies in our society. And meantime times true with some of the more affluent churches as well. Many times this money just stays in the bank in investment portfolios and because of the dearth of ideas and the fact that many times the professionals in the agency do not really see new program investors and work with the community to deal with those not much happens. So that as I understand the thrust that you are trying to organize with Fred Hill's assistance and the assistance of I think it's called Band wise that's the professional association of black YMCA workers.

Speaker 9 00:13:04.670
Yes the National Association of it's not just the staff it's laymen and employees of the YMCA. It's composed as 90 percent black. But we have Asians and Chicanos as members and this was started in 1968 in an effort to deal with institutional racism. Of course now now what's that. What is institutional racism.

Speaker 10 00:13:29.840
And how does that relate to a YMCA or any other.

Speaker 11 00:13:33.860
I think yeah we can give you some good some good illustrations of how that functioned in the way some folks will remember but back in the early nineteen hundreds at Julius Rosenwald provided twenty five dollars twenty five thousand dollar seed money.

Speaker 9 00:13:52.490
You said in one and come up with 75000 he would build a black YMCA. And that that worked. Now some people feel like that was the beginning of control by the whites because one stipulation on it was that the when those bills were built the White YMCA leadership control the property and the way it was built as a branch and the Senate built as a brand central y board would control it control the property.

Speaker 12 00:14:25.280
And of course between that and the new management systems which converted many of these autonomous YMCA to branches and made our professional and lay leaders look to headquarters for instructions. All of that helped decrease the course community support.

Speaker 13 00:14:45.590
How does that really relate to institutional racism. Knowing my history.

Speaker 14 00:14:49.260
But you said that someone who was white put up certain amount of money that was matched by some other people to be a branch largely because at that time in many communities because of legal segregation black people couldn't go.

Speaker 13 00:15:02.570
So in a sense the man does a good thing and now we're saying it's the beginning of institutional racism. So how did how did we really deal with that. What are some of the ways out of that or how do we. Oh what is it. First of all why do you why it's institution race as well. Secondly how can the why and society at large deal with this. Because this is not only typical of the whites typical of a number socially.

Speaker 12 00:15:24.470
Well I didn't mean to say that was institutional racism in and of itself. And we have to recognize as that we need resources outside of our community but this is mainly how we deal with these kinds of gifts or opportunities or resources. And I think our own folks went to work and in my soul and this enlightened folks like people. Yeah. As the years roll by when you got to the 40s and 50s we started pushing integration and we close up this we closed up our own wires saying that we ought to all be together and other YMCA not realizing that we would lose the value supports and family supports supports to the educational systems. By the way you know the YMCA the black where I was there were more wise it on black college campuses than they were in the cities in the early days. So we lost all that strength we had with young adults. And what have you in our efforts in our rush to integrate now. Nothing. I'm not trying to say that's bad. But I think we didn't think through strategy most of what we were trying to do what we were after.

Speaker 14 00:16:38.900
No there isn't part of the institutional racism that you referred to that in this move toward integration. The staffs of the central wise to whom these branch wise related remain predominantly white. And the programming also tended to be concerned with issues that were more related to middle class white people which were not that there weren't on some middle class black people that if I won the allegation I've heard about the black why is it that they were primarily middle class bastions.

Speaker 13 00:17:07.849.9999999998836
Yes. And that might have been one of the reasons why they moved easily into the white middle class y situation but still in those communities physically where those YMCA buildings were and are the communities are predominantly black and in San Antonio and I think in the Mission District in San Francisco predominately Hispanic.

Speaker 14 00:17:29.150
And so now the parts of some of the Chinatowns of the nation possibly predominantly Chinese. So therefore there is this need to meet the concerns of a constituency that is not middle class white. And I think what you're referring to I think is generally what's referred to when one speaks of institutional racism. Is that in both the staffing patterns and the programming patterns the concerns of blacks and other minorities are not reflected and almost becomes kind of an organized thing whether it's a purpose of or intended to be aimed at hurting people. The ultimate result comes to that now where we wanted to.

Speaker 12 00:18:13.370
Let me let me see if I can help. I think I'm going a direction we want to go see one response to that. Our main response now is to say to the YMCA that the YMCA is composed of a rich diversity of values and traditions similar to our society we have we have tended to ignore those or we want a merger about a meld everybody into one tradition. And so now we're becoming a more tolerant of the different.

Speaker 13 00:18:45.320
Tolerance is a term that really how to be well off because it means accepting something all right. You don't really want to leave you're trying to build on the positive nature of the pluralism yes and positive recognition of the pluralism that exists in our society because basically in a sense you've reflected what a number of people have felt about agencies like the why that they are being pushed as I say into the 20th century almost into the 21st century.

Speaker 14 00:19:13.220
Reluctantly and I think one of the things that Fred Hill and you and Ben Weiss group wants to work on is ways of moving into this pluralistic approach more positively now possibly Fred maybe you could tell us what you and maybe your associates at the black affairs center are trying to do to help the Y to move into this pluralistic function more effectively.

Speaker 15 00:19:38.660
Well you know I think I'd like the backup on a group that you mentioned which is band wise which really began as a caucus group or protest group actually in protest to some of the examples of institutional racism the absence of people in key decision making positions the absence of programs that seem to meet the constituencies needs and to try to develop alternative strategies. Fortunately this group is rather unusual I think you and I have had a history Rosco where we have worked with similar. Established institutions where there were people who felt themselves out of the mainstream and not in position to effect any kind of meaningful changes that that would relate to their concerns. I think band Wise is a very mature kind of organization composed of people who have the skill as well as the sensitivity to design programs and to set in positions of responsibility and act accordingly. And now part of what I've been doing with Jesse and others is to try to translate some of the goals and objectives of band wise into program aspects that could be easily instituted within the YMCA framework under the rubric of what we're calling a multi cultural multi-ethnic thrust within the YMCA and specifically we got the concept of a multi-purpose Black Cultural Center.

Speaker 16 00:21:11.840
And Jesse I don't know if you might want to pick up on that.

Speaker 12 00:21:15.300
Yes the black cultural center as we perceive it as the black YMCA at its best. And we. That's right.

Speaker 10 00:21:27.790
Madison Avenue. I like I like YMCA and it's better that. Tell us about that would we.

Speaker 12 00:21:38.580
We have projected this to as a program that we'll work on over the next 12 years.

Speaker 17 00:21:45.300
I have a hope that in 1978 which would be our hundred and twenty fifth anniversary of the beginning of the YMCA in black communities that we would at that point really make a lot of loud noises about what we what is going on now to give you an idea what would go on and a cultural center of this nature. One program we're working on is a so so-called African God's program. Now some people may know about the Indian Guides program which is in the YMCA which is an example of a program that ethnically culturally based. So Indian youth program to Native American Native American Yeah. But it's called Indian guys. Now we are in the process of developing an African guides program and that's a father and son or uncle and nephew kind of a program. So for little little boys and men it's the kind of program that you don't need a facility you don't need a lot of money people can. Can this program operate in a person's living room or basement or whatever.

Speaker 18 00:22:57.810
And so that is why do you need a why. Well you need it. You need leadership because you don't just have little tribes you end up with nations.

Speaker 17 00:23:06.660
You develop nations and and of course you know it becomes a nationwide program not just one little problem in one neighborhood. And if I can just interrupt international in scope and international That's correct. Yes because we have African Wow.

Speaker 14 00:23:21.430
I did. You were immersed in this and it comes through very clearly. But to someone who's not completely immersed in it doesn't come to quite so clearly. Now I gather the purpose of this African guy program is to develop a rapprochement and interaction between black people in America and black people in Africa so that they can understand more of the commonality of African cultures throughout the world. Is that it's quite right and you're gonna do this by relating individuals you know who come out of the YMCA the predominately black YMCA is in the United States with their counterparts or some counterpart individual in an African nation. Is that the No.

Speaker 11 00:24:03.940
No. What will this is strictly an American program between a father and son.

Speaker 9 00:24:10.140
It's just designed that fathers and sons would relate to each other in a very meaningful way. Now.

Speaker 17 00:24:17.460
We use as a base are African background an African YMCA. We have will assist us to be sure we have authentic representation of the African culture and what have you and the program we produce here.

Speaker 19 00:24:32.640
So in a sense the black father will relate to his son. Yes. And talk about and maybe carry out some African literature. SONG Yes clothing et cetera et cetera. What about giving the black youth some awareness of his African background. Yes. And that is all addressing and family intervention in the family.

Speaker 11 00:24:54.470
NASA oh there is no father. How do we deal with that. Well that's an interesting question because in some tribes in Africa we found that the Father the Son often relates to the uncle in a very deliberate way feeling that the uncle is more understanding and maybe not as harsh on his son on the child as a father would be. So it's not necessary to cut a show it's not necessary for it to be a father.

Speaker 18 00:25:26.190
It could be any black male figure. Particularly particular young person at some of the other things I understand you plan to deal with things like consumer education things like development of housing programs youth advocacy advocacy work helping young people who are in trouble tutoring programs development of business seminars and so on another Where is it as you call it a cultural center it's almost like a service center.

Speaker 19 00:25:52.610
And of course that's consistent with the previous role of the Y name. So that's you have to serve in a variety of things.

Speaker 11 00:25:58.740
That's then leads me to ask you the question what about women oh Mothers Club.

Speaker 19 00:26:05.480
Yes. That we don't have to get into a stereotype a permanent role as a mother. But I know that.

Speaker 11 00:26:12.350
Why I a that's a name of a group of women within the YMCA and generally if you want to look well I think that in the black was haven't quite had the hang up that of white wives have had with female participation or participation by women. And I don't I think that we will continue to to have women in all kinds of activities. Now the other program that goes with the African guides is the African princess which is already on a drought drawing board which is the mother daughter program.

Speaker 4 00:26:44.210
So there'll be you know who is the woman who'll be part of it in a much relationship between the White Dove is another white Eva's going through probably even more trials and tribulations and the why. Ms. Yes that's quite right. Race situation. Yeah. Are you relating to constituencies that were formerly y w constituencies.

Speaker 9 00:27:05.030
Not that I know of. I'm in communication with the national executive of the YWCA. She's very interested in cultural center program. And so we were just talking about it this time I believe we'll work out a way of collaborating.

Speaker 14 00:27:21.800
I see and Fred one last question. And do you see something in their approach to why is doing as a model for other social serving organizations that are trying to reach the inner city.

Speaker 20 00:27:31.340
Yes I do. Roscoe and that's one of the things that excites me about working with this program and with the YMCA I think too too often you and I both have experienced young people saying that they don't have any institutions that they can relate to they're concerned about building black institutions. And one of the things that I see that's attractive about this thrust is that here it is here is a black institution already in existence and all we need to do is to familiarize young people with the history.

Speaker 18 00:28:06.140
And for me right there with the history and turn them in that direction and hopefully they'll support those programs. I think that's a good point in which to end our program tonight I'd like to thank Fred Hill and Jesse Alexander for discussing the ways in which the YMCA is attempting to relate to the black community.

Speaker 21 00:28:24.290
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:38.580
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

