Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:21.631
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:48.641
The "Soul of Reason" is an analysis of the heart and the soul of the Black man's raison d'être; his reason for being. "Soul of Reason" examines Black thought: thought in art, music, literature, politics, religion, drama, education, economics, sports and entertainment. Indeed, every facet of the Black man's expanding horizons. Now for today's exploration of the "Soul of Reason" we have as our guests Mr. Gil Moses, Director of the new play that has just opened on Broadway, "Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death". Welcome to "Soul of Reason", Gil.

Gil Moses 00:01:23.053
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:24.911
Well this play has already gotten a lot of tongues to wagging and I thought we could begin the show by asking you, as the director, just what you are trying to get across in Melvin Van Peebles play "Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death"?

Gil Moses 00:01:40.150
What do you mean tongues are wagging? In what way?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:42.640
Well a number of people are saying it's a very exciting show. A number of people, some white, saying they don't completely understand the show. Some others are saying that it's a little too fast, it moves a little too fast, and they aren't really able to understand what's trying to come across. And since you're the director and have a lot to do with establishing the pace of the show I thought it might be kind of interesting to the audience for you to, just sort of, tell us what you're trying to get across in the show in your role as a director.

Gil Moses 00:02:11.652
Primarily the show is about Black love. And I was primarily interested in investigating the different aspects of love that exist in the Black community. Structurally the show talks about our position in the social scale. That is -- and when you come and see the play you'll see that looking above, towering over everything, is this perch which a white person with a black, which a Black person in a white mask visits from time to time. And essentially that structure shows that we are colonized: that the ghetto was a colonized place. And that it is simply controlled for the most part by the power structure: its ideas, its economic system is controlled. And structurally on the stage we have shown that. The actors sometimes relate to the person who's standing on the perch: they send money up to him, you know, sometimes he drops money down like a poverty program, like a welfare program. And when there's a spark of life in the Black community, as you see in the last part of the play, you'll see the man on the perch with a spotlight, at which he singles out those people who are creating a disturbance. He throws streamers down from time to time which is money -- which is green streamers -- which are the economic ties. So structurally we've created a situation which shows that the ghetto, rather than a mythological state of mind, is actually a place in which Black people have been placed in and unable to move over the last, let's say, 50 years. It's an actual area of land which has not permitted any-- which the power structure is not permitted in migration from. Now that's structurally. In terms of the characters of the play, each of those characters in the play have an incredible -- well they're human [laughs] and one of the things that I tried to get at in the play was to talk about the humanity of people, the deepest fears of people, rather than cover it over with some sort of a, let's say romanticism. Romanticism either in terms of glorification of Black people or the glorification of nationalism. So essentially I simply tried to get at the human -- the humanity of the people that Peebles was talking about and place them in a structure which was easily understandable for everyone. I mean, make no mistake, that we are still colonized. And our ideas for the most part determined either through reaction or -- either by reaction or by oppression by the power structure.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:11.301
Now I understand the play is a series of episodes and one moves right after the other -

Gil Moses 00:05:15.800
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:15.802
- without any particular storyline linking them other than, as you say ,the overriding structure of the play.

Gil Moses 00:05:21.261
There is a storyline but you have to come back once or twice to see it. Now there is an incredible continuity that goes on throughout the play. The play sort of develops so that the main pawn has focus. Yet there are other things happening around it which are lit in different lights which show what's going on. So you can follow a character all the way through the play -- you can follow the progression of each of these characters all the way through the play.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:47.601
Now how did you and Van Peebles get together on this? You seem to describe the thrust of the play and the verve of the play just so internally as though it almost came from you. Yet I know that was written by Van Peebles himself. Now how did the two of you get [cross talk] together to articulate your ideas and so on?

Gil Moses 00:06:08.530
Essentially when I direct I am like a jazz musician. I'd take the head of the tune and then play the hell out of it, [laughs] you know. And so when I -- if I do describe it, you know, with such, you know, feeling it's simply because it is mine. And [Cross talk]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:25.113
In other words, you've taken these words that Van Peebles wrote and then you have extended them, as sort of an extension of your own personality, your own view of looking at the [Cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:06:37.350
Yes, yeah that's absolutely correct. I mean of course Melvin and I talked a great deal. But essentially it's the director's job to translate talk into theatrical symbolism to get theatrical meaning.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:51.601
Well what about the actors themselves? Particularly in a play like this where you're dealing with sort of a pervasive theme. I would imagine that the individual feelings that the actors have a lot to do with the way in which they create their roles -

Gil Moses 00:07:05.160
Absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:05.162
- or are they really responding almost directly to your lead that you've established?

Gil Moses 00:07:11.290
Well yes and no. The actors I chose were, are incredibly strong and capable people. And I chose them not only for their talent but also because of their consciousness. You know, I feel like the for the most part the political consciousness of the show is in direct proportion to the political consciousness of the people involved. And I didn't want to -- I didn't go for "Actor" actors. I went for people who were incredibly talented and at the same time had their heads together. So we talked about the production a great deal and they, through their invention and through -- with my stimulus created the parts and created the whole, whatever, flow of, you know, the subtext.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:55.930
Now when you talk about political consciousness you're talking more again of a pervasive understanding of the condition of Black people rather than [Cross Talk] one particular ideology per se.

Gil Moses 00:08:07.471
Yes and no, too. Now let me get this straight. What I mean is [pause] for one thing it takes a certain amount of political consciousness to understand the attitudes of Black people. Actors for the most part do not -- I mean actors generally are trained to be white people, right? And actors are politically unconscious for the most part [laughs]. I mean after all it's a "me" individual business and everyone is trying to make it on their own, you know. And a lot of Blackness in terms of understanding what Black movements are, what Black style is, the Black use of rhythm, that's bred out of actors, for the most part. So you're looking for people who consciously have not bred that out of themselves who've refused to allow the system to rip that out of them. And that takes an understanding of what is important to a Black person as a Black artist. So that's first, the awareness of what is important in the creation of Black art becomes important in terms of what actor I choose; His awareness. In terms of political ideology: we had many political ideologies within the cast, so you know. Except that one thing was marked in the cast was that they were aware that it was necessary for them to be Black people, you know, which is a big step I think.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:31.290
Now what about audience response? Obviously in something like this you have both the Blacks in the audience and whites in the audience. And you know some of the critics, for example some of the white critics, are saying they can't review it. And of course some of the Black critics [Cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:09:45.152
You know I think [cross talk] that's the most ridiculous thing I have ever heard.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:47.241
Okay, let's hear that.

Gil Moses 00:09:48.161
You know simply because, you know, you bring Genet here -- Genet is French, homosexual -- you bring him here and they'll talk about his incredible underworld, subterranean thought. They're not homosexual nor are they French, you know. You bring Grotowski here, they can't even understand the language, let alone the cultural symbols which he's using and all of a sudden they can review that. Seems that they can review everything except that which is closest to them; they can review everything but Black people. Now that it's because they, obviously a patronizing thing and you know [cross talk] they don't think-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:20.821
And they've been under, some of them have been under great attack. And they have sort of -- their response to the attack from some Black critics who say that white critics can't review it is to say, 'Well look I don't know anything about it, it's your thing'. [cross talk] I think that's a cop-out too.

Gil Moses 00:10:33.370
[cross talk] But the whole point is that no one ever gets to review it as theatre, one it becomes important not only as theatre. It helps if they would review it. Let's say if they would take it seriously they would see that a new kind of theatre is being developed a theatre that actually translates relevancies of today into theatrical assemblies. A theatre that actually confronts society. The kind of theatre that they've read about in their, whatever, their superficial academic [laughs] you know, things they've read about talked about. That's what black theatre is doing there, yet they can't face it. It's like so patronizing, you know, it's something they don't think Black directors can direct they don't think Black directors can conceive of anything that would demand their thought. The last play I directed in New York was "Slave Ship". Well I read a review of that in TDI. You know that the TDI kind of review ran long--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:28.691
very academic right.

Gil Moses 00:11:30.041
Right. OK. Stefan Brecht wrote this thing and he wrote it as if he discovered all the things that were in there. He discovered the juxtapositions of thought, he discovered, you know, all sorts of symbols. He wrote it as if, I had like, he said 'the director'. I mean, I can't get over the way he-- the patronizing attitude, he took with the director and then wrote exactly what was intended. You know what I mean? And it's, yeah, it's, you know the only way we can deal with them-- simply because they have a sore spot with Blacks.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:59.350
Well I think that it comes from two, two points. It is true that, oh about, three or four years ago, when some of the white critics tried to review Black plays and sometimes they were complimentary, sometimes they weren't, about half and half. For many the Black critics and even some of the Black actors began to say, 'Well white critics can't critique Black plays.' I personally think that's really sort of a cop-out when a white critic then says, 'Well I'm not going to say anything at all about it because I don't know.' Now he might acknowledge the fact that he is white and he sees from different point of view but there's still, as you say, a number of universals in plays which obviously they can comment on.

Gil Moses 00:12:44.320
Yeah, I mean it's like if you reviewed an O'Casey play you would review it with the idea of the, whatever the culture, the language, the idea of what the people were about within the structure of that within its own logic you would have something to say about it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:02.130
Now what about the audience reaction? Obviously in a play like this I would assume that the audience reaction is very very key because this sort of feeds back to the actors and actors feedback to the audience et cetera. I would imagine at least in many of your preview showings you had a large number of Blacks in the audience. I don't know, now that is actually open to the public, exactly what the proportion of Black and white in the audience is and what the reaction of the audience is.

Gil Moses 00:13:31.440
Well we've built a whole publicity campaign for Black people because we just are directing our whole attention to Black people. The play was directed for Black people. Hopefully we can build an audience of Black people on Broadway. It opens the doors on a whole lot of levels, so it sets a standard for community theatre even, you know what I mean, as well as permits people, sometimes, permits playwrights to write for Broadway. There's no reason why we shouldn't. And there's no reason why we shouldn't write for Broadway and not have it emasculated, you know. So right now I'd say it's about half and half. At the beginning however, during previews and the opening it was almost 90 percent Black which was really glorious, you know, fantastic and their response has been great.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:20.240
Now how how is the -- do you notice a difference? I would imagine it would be a difference in white response or Black response or can you actually tell just tell from general audience [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:14:27.490
Well all I feel is that the Black audience usually responds vocally to what is going on. And so different things: so sometimes is if it's 50/50 the white audience sits there and the Black audience wants to respond but can't quite do it because the Black audience is like, I mean the white audience is like, doesn't understand, you know what I mean.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:46.531
On the other hand you're really talking about life. It's true you're talking about things that a number of white people really don't know about. Although with the media and with the coming of certain of our music and certain of our movies, more and more the white audience is tuned in to some of the things that are happening in the Black community. So it would appear to me that part of the reluctance of the white audience to respond is a kind of an inhibition as though they might laugh at the wrong thing or they might respond to the wrong thing. [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:15:17.340
Well I think [cross talk] that's true too. But a lot of white people simply don't believe that Blacks are human. I mean this is just a fact. And I mean so it depends on what stock you have in the inhumanity of Blacks, depends on whether you respond. You know like it's just weird, whatever an audience invests itself in if-- if it invests itself in one thing that makes it rigid and it is unable to really respond to something else, you know what I mean. And this audience, you know -- of course there are a lot of liberals that come, you know, that respond, and I'm not ashamed of their response, and just laugh all over the place, you know. But generally I don't think it's so much an embarrassment of not knowing when to laugh. I think it's simply an inability to recognize that what the people are doing can be, is exactly what their grandmamas did [laughs]. I mean on a universal, on a human level, you know. They have lesbians, homosexuals, pimps in the white society where lesbians and homosexuals, you known [cross talk]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:15.300
That's right [cross talk], almost every group has gone through some phase of exploring their own humanity.

Gil Moses 00:16:19.171
Yeah listen. Yeah you know it's like ridiculous. See it's what happens -- okay white people and and a Black reaction is quite similar to me in, you know, it's a Black reaction saying that-- Look, when I was young my mother said, 'Stay away from rhythm and blues,' you know ' it's trashy music.' Right? You know, 'Stay away from Henry who lives next door,' right? 'cause he's a pimp' per day, you know. And all the bourgeois people, at that time, you know, we know what the coloreds went through, you know. Now I think we're going through a similar reaction but it's on another plane. And I think that a whole lot of Black people or many Black people react to the play with that same bourgeois attitude although they're in a different place. You know what I'm trying to say is there's a bourgeois nationalism going around, you know what I mean, which refuses to admit the humanity or the existence of, you know, simply because they've had to create an idea of themselves which has very little to do I think with people in the street.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:12.819.9999999998836
Yeah of course one question now that has been brought up and came up in regard to "Sweetback" is well [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:17:18.141.00000000011642
This ain't "Sweetback" though.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:19.020
Okay, 'This ain't "Sweetback " ', you dig it. Okay, I dig it, right, you're right on that. But what I was trying to make another point and that is in terms of themes the question that some Blacks have raised as to how much emphasis, relative emphasis, should be placed on those aspects of the Black life that -- even though they are part of the life possibly would not be a part of life if the Blacks were in total society? For example how much emphasis- [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:17:45.752
No I don't think so,

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:45.757
[cross talk] should be placed on pimps and whores and -

Gil Moses 00:17:47.971
it depends on what kind of theatre you're developing if you're developing a theatre for the elite, obviously not. If you're developing a popular audience where you want those pimps and whores in there, which we do, then you better talk about it. [cross talk]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:59.250
Right, right. Well that really is the point. The point -- I think the point is not so much that you're saying 'This is the way all people ought to be.' But you're saying 'A lot of people are this way, And if we want to relate to them we have to relate to something that they understand in their own lifestyle.' [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:18:12.980
I'm saying the only way we're going to deal with our culture in any way is to face the things that we're most afraid of in ourselves. And being a homosexual or being a lesbian and being a pimp, or whatever it is, everybody has whether they, you know -- everybody has that fear and we have to face that. You know, theatre is supposed to be [cross talk] a place where we come and confront our own selves. It's not some place that we're supposed to come and be transported to some sort of mythological Nirvana, I'm sorry! [cross talk] You know this is -- to me Black should be uncomfortable. We want to build a strong culture within, let's do it! But not do it on some myth.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:43.580
Yeah. This has to do with the role of theatre in the entire culture. Black or white. Namely the point that you raised about the role of theatre to confront the realities that exist in society which I imagine comes in conflict with some other people in theatre who think that the role of theatre, in part, is to do that but it also is to extol the more beautiful.

Gil Moses 00:19:03.401
Well I see. Well I agree with both. I mean, I know, and -- some plays dictate one method, you know, each play is different. So another play dictates another method, you know, at the same time I wouldn't say that every play should end in victory, you know.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:16.301
That's beautiful! That's really for me as a theatre goer, that's what I expect of theatre. I expect one night I might have one type of experience another night I might have another type of experience. I really want it to be an experience, though. I don't want it to be a sham, [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:19:28.290
Right, right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:28.661
and that is really the point of what total theatre is about. Let's talk about Gil Moses the person. How did you get into directing?

Gil Moses 00:19:36.850
I started in theatre when I was nine at caramel in Cleveland I was an actor, right. So as I grew up, I grew up acting [laughs] and then I went to Oberlin College at which point I decided that an actor was no longer a possibility for me because Oberlin was primarily white, and I didn't speak -- my diction wasn't good enough for Shakespeare [laughs] and also they didn't want any Black people doing Shakespeare.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:03.340
I'm sure you diction was good enough. I think the latter is the real question. [laughter]

Gil Moses 00:20:06.720
You know like, you know how you feel funny? You know you feel funny because you -- at that time you're not thinking of doing your T's you thinking of expressing yourself, you know. And they were, you know, and so they had a kind of homosexual theatre. I'm talking about a mentally [crosstalk] a mentally weak theatre. And I don't-- I was just caught in a perverse statement there, which I'll explain later. Okay, so I decided that point at Oberlin that I couldn't get involved in that and decided the only thing for me to do was to start my own groups. And so I did at Oberlin, I mean, I directed then; no longer being possible-- it was impossible for me to act, so I directed. And spent two and a half years at Oberlin and went to Paris on a scholarship to study at the Sorbonne. And through French, you know, got involved in theatre literature, at least the kind of popular theatre. When I came back to Oberlin and quit, and went down south and became -- was editor for a newspaper there.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:09.112
Which newspaper?

Gil Moses 00:21:09.862
The Mississippi Free Press. And I was a writer at that time -- actor -- and at the same time this idea for a theatre was happening in my head, you know. And so, let's say in 1963, when I was 21, I started the Free Southern Theatre which was -- you know about it, the Free Southern Theatre was a theatre that traveled to all parts of the South and put on plays of [cross talk, unintelligible] well right. Right. And so from that Free Southern Theatre I wrote plays, and I acted, and I directed and that's what it was about.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:53.001
Well what about opportunities for other Blacks to get into this? So you've told really sort of the classic success story: you start when you're young, you get into it, you have an experience here and experience here, and gradually you work into it. Now, is this the way most Blacks have to get into directing a theatre or is it something that a person, let's say when he's 19 or 21 or 23, can decide to get into?

Gil Moses 00:22:16.340
Yeah, I mean, see what happened was I was very lucky when I was a kid, just like Miles was lucky to be playing the trumpet when he was 14 [laughs], you dig? You know I was lucky all right. But the Free Southern Theatre itself started a whole lot of people in theatre. And since the Free Southern Theatre and Black Arts in Harlem and the Concept East and Black Arts -- since all of those theatres a number of [other] theatres have cropped up. It seems to me the best place to learn is in a Black situation, you know, in a Black community theatre. That is an incredible stimulus. If you could -- if communities could form that type of thing, that would be the most incredible thing that could happen for the development of talent [cross talk]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:00.902
Now you say it's the best opportunity the best place. What is the reason for that? Why, as you say, a Black community theatre is the best place for them to learn? Why is it better than [cross talk] let's say go to formal schooling? Or it is not better; [cross talk] maybe it's a combination of both?

Gil Moses 00:23:17.180
There's very little formal schooling that is of interest to Black people, I think, in the arts. Very little [cross talk]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:24.740
You say of interest or of relevance or of..? [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:23:28.040
Of interest. Now I mean should be of interest, you know what I mean. Which would be of relevance. But I don't know. I'm talking about, you see, Black theatre is something that has recently been created to me. I'm not talking about -- I'm talking about third world theatre. The addressing of a Black audience, I'm talking about, there's a definite split, you know, historically through what the Black play was trying to do in terms of its audience. It seems as though that they're not many -- regardless of how many teachers there are -- there's incredible brain drain right now going on for Black teachers to teach in all these schools. But I feel it's almost impossible for these Black teachers to have studied what has gone down in the last 10 years so thoroughly that they can -- you know and right now we're finding out how to train the Black actor. I mean, I am, Barbara Ann Teer is, Imamu is -- trying to -- we're discovering that and I'm not saying that that discovery is limited to us. I'm saying that there is a discovery and we do not quite know yet. And so the best place for the other people learn either would be with those people who are trying to find out what it is rather than those people who haven't withstood superficial analysis of what it is. And in those places where the Black theatre can become a force.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:45.241
Well one of the factors in development of Black theatre, or any other kind of theatre, is economics. And one way the Black community theatre sort of bypasses some of those really terrific economic problems and its base right there. But then let's assume the actor begins to develop some competence and so on. What then about outlets what then about the economics? Because I don't know the detail of the economics of "Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death" but I'm sure that it took a lot of bread to put something like that on Broadway.

Gil Moses 00:25:14.141
Right, then it becomes hard. I mean it would be simple for me to say we have to lease our own place. We have to build our own audience. You know, we have to create and maintain our own standards of it, so that we're not dependent on -- economically or psychologically or mentally -- on the white society to determine what we're doing. It's so that would provide jobs for us, you know what I mean, to work as actors and directors not as -- [noise] excuse me -- not as personalities or not as whatever types that make white people comfortable, you know.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:53.962
I can see that. Right. [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:25:55.070
So it is up to us to establish some sort of system which Black people can come into, you know, and work as people and as workers as artists rather than -- I feel like almost to be an actor or director at this point is almost an impossibility.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:12.990
Do you mean to be one professionally? Carry out [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:26:15.173
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:15.621
Without doing a number of other things [cross talk]

Gil Moses 00:26:16.872
Right, right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:17.151
Because I know a number of fellows they read, they do records, they do stuff for the blind,

Gil Moses 00:26:21.622
[laughs] Right, right, that's what I'm saying!

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:23.990
maitre d in a hotel and a few other things.

00:26:26.292
When somebody says, you know, they 'want to be an actor' I say, well, that's impossible from the get go. [cross talk] 'I want to be a director'. Forget it [laughs]!

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:32.411
Yeah, but except that you like it, see? And the other thing is that you respond to it very favorably. In other words you are surviving. People like you and Barbara Ann, Imamu, a number of people are surviving, both as actors and as directors. Which does mean that there is a tremendous future here for Blacks in the theatre.

Gil Moses 00:26:52.520
Yeah there is, and I would like to see it, however, go in a certain way. I wouldn't like to see us ripped off, you know. As we are being ripped off now.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:03.061
By ripped off you mean taken off into the major media and ..?

Gil Moses 00:27:06.261
Right. Every, you know, every -- taken off into the mainstream to merchandise whatever the white person thinks Black people should be or merchandise whatever white people think should make money. No, I hope that our talent isn't ripped off in that fashion.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:21.240
OK. I think that's a beautiful point on which we can begin to close our show today. You've really told us about the, in a sense, the heart and the soul of a Black director. Thanks very much Gil for bringing us such an insightful view into the role of the Black director, how Black theatre is developing, what you're trying to do in your new play as you've taken the ideas which relate to the realities of life of the Black people as developed by Melvin Van Peebles in your play "Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death" which is appearing at the Barrymore Theatre on Broadway. Thanks to Gil Moses, Director, for being our guest on today's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:02.960
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, and featuring a distinguished guests voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us once again next week.

