Roscoe 00:00:01.300
What do these seven African countries have in common. Mali Upper Volta Mauritania Chad Senegal Niger Gambia yes. Drought famine death here Joy zone of Reigns discuss what that organization is doing about the African famine on tonight's soul of reason. This is Soul of reason.

Intro 00:00:48.380
A program that will examine the roots of the black thought soul of reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Roscoe 00:01:12.740
With us this evening on soul of reason is Joy Zellner of rains which is relief for Africans in need and Suhail. Glad to have you with us tonight Joy. Thank you for having me Dr. Brown. Now firstly you could probably tell us a little about what Reines is and what he's trying to do. And then as we get into it you can tell us more about the depth and the significance of what's happening in Africa in the Suhail region.

Joy Zellner 00:01:42.950
Well I think rain's first of all is a very unique experience very unique experience within the black community in the United States and perhaps a very unique experience in the world. It's for the first time I think that black organizations that range from core to NWACP the convention of lawyers relief and if go the Internet just foundation for community organizations have gotten together to do something about a situation that is uniquely black and uniquely African. I think it's the first time that you've seen a coalition of black organizations doing this sort of thing. It came about as you know as a result of the horrible stories that came out in the press a little over 18 months ago about the drought in West Africa and the lack of attention by the world in general for this area. After several meetings in June of 1973 a group of us decided that it wasn't you know not useful for one organization to try to raise funds or to try to inform the American public about the situation in the Suhail that it would be much more useful much more I'd have much more of an impact if all of us could get together and work to inform the American public first of all to put pressure for the first time in the United States government to do something about an African situation. And this is how rains came about and this is how we came to be working with me.

Roscoe 00:03:09.260
I think it's very productive because as you say it does represent sort of a breakthrough in at least black international affairs as some many years ago possibly in the civil rights revolution there were several organization that worked together. For example the March on Washington. But in terms of relating to the needs of Africa this is one of the very very few times for the first time in any significant number of black organizations have gotten together to coalesce to move in to dealing with the situation. And speaking of the situation we've heard all kinds of things. We've heard that you know 3 million people are going  to die. Five million people are going to die or one million people have already died that they have practically no food in this sub-Saharan region and it's a heel. Could you tell our listening audience exactly what the situation is at least as far as you know it because I know the information flow is sometimes --

Joy Zellner 00:04:04.601
information flow is very slow because we're also dealing with problems of underdevelopment and that also entails the fact that we don't have the technology to gather information and disseminate this information as it should be done. One of the difficult problems of deciding or you know how many people have really died is that you're dealing with a very large area you're dealing with an area just almost twice the size of the United States.

Roscoe 00:04:26.901
Most people aren't even aware of that

Joy Zellner 00:04:28.282
They don't even they're not even aware of that. And you're also dealing with an area where most of the people are nomads and where we just don't have the technology to do the counting. It is true that in 1973 people were dying people were not only dying of star starvation they were also dying from diseases that normally do not kill you know children were dying from measles German measles which doesn't normally kill they were dying from you know coughs They were dying from everything but this was the result of you know hunger as well as malnutrition and just general debilitation. We will not really know what the results of that have been for a long time to come but we do know that in 1973 and 74 there was emergency food that help to stop gap. You know the problem this year fortunately there is a crop. There was some rain last year there was in some areas it was too much rain and crops were flooded out but they did have a minimum crop in most of the areas and food emergency food is still coming in. You know countries in Western Europe the United States and other countries in Africa have given enough food to see them through this emergency too. It's less of an emergency this year than it was let's say in 73 or 74. But the fact remains that we still have to reconstruct the area.

Roscoe 00:05:43.490
I think that's a very important point. Les the audience think that the crisis is really over and got some weed and what are the other foods.

Joy Zellner 00:05:51.295
Sorghum you know most people you know unfortunately the press goes from one you know sensational report to the other the sensational report last year was people were starving there was no rain this year it is rain and you even see reports that the greening of the Suhail it's it's ridiculous to think that one rainy season will do away with you know six years of drought and starvation or that one rainy season will reconstruct the roads. It doesn't happen that way at all. No these economies have suffered terribly in the last six seven years and it's going to take them another generation to recuperate completely. But in that time we cannot just wait for the rain we have to make provision we have to develop the area. We have to develop road systems we have to develop proper farming and proper rotation of crops. And we're dealing with very poor economies that cannot pay for this. And this is where you know the work of rains and or other organizations or goodwill has to continue as a matter of fact it has to increase because we cannot sit down and say it rained last year. Therefore people are no longer starving. You know some experimental farms have worked there only goes to prove that it can work. You know I'm a firm believer in the fact that this world has the technology no one needs starve in this modern world. It's a matter of redistribution of wealth. And it's a matter of realist you know reevaluating our sense of values. You know it doesn't make sense that one half of a population even within the United States can eat enough and throw away enough and one half can starve. So it's not only a problem of Africa. You know we tend to forget it's a whole problem of peoples you know and especially black people. Let's face it it's a prejudiced world you know and I don't think that you know talking of the third world is gonna solve our problems either. You know we have to think in terms of black people being concerned about black people no matter where they are. Because in effect what happens in Africa affects us directly here and vice versa. So that reigns even though our main concern is the Suhail and Africa in general. We also see it as a total plan of poor people here in the United States people who are starving United States do not. So this you know I don't want us to see it as

Roscoe 00:07:59.061
most certainly the whole problem of feeding people in the world. What might be called a world famine or a potential world famine is a is a key issue. But to get back to the Suhail in a sense other than the poor distribution of wealth et cetera the real trigger for the crisis was an unprecedented drought. It was a debilitation of nature. Then there wasn't enough rain the soil began to erode it became very very dry the cattle couldn't graze in many places 80 to 90 percent of the cattle in the country just died. And then the effect not only on getting enough food to live but enough food of adequate nutritional quality to be able to give the body those resources natural resources to fight off diseases et cetera. So that you have a situation that is brought about initially by natural condition contaminated by political and economic conditions which gets into the whole area that is really confusing. What for example has the United Nations done. What are they doing. What has the United States done. For example we've heard that the United States was under fire over a certain amount of food and and it turns out that they had two airplanes and they were charging what is it twenty five thousand dollars a day or something for the use of these planes.

Speaker 2 00:09:25.510
I personally don't know the facts because the information on this that feeds back is sporadic and is certainly filtered and I think one of the important functions of an organization like Raines is to provide a reasonably accurate information flow so that we can know what the situation is. I know at one time someone was bringing a truck up on a hundred twenty first three and putting some canned soup.

Roscoe 00:09:50.240
Well how canned beans well basically which we couldn't spend send over to my virtual folks don't eat that. Secondly it probably cost more to send it over there then it does to collect it.

Joy Zellner 00:10:00.021
That's exactly it. That's precisely what happened in that particular case. But the United Nations was the world to the United Nations a long time to decide that this was in fact a disaster because historically they've considered earthquakes and floods to be natural disasters but nobody had considered you know a drought that had lasted five six years to be a natural disaster. So it took them quite a few months to decide that a United Nations emergency funds could be used for that area once that had been accepted. The FAO all involved with Mr. Berman and others have been working in terms of relief immediate relief for the areas. First of all and now they're working with reconstruction and redevelopment in terms of agricultural production etc. They are doing quite a bit but they are to it depends on how much money they united nations organization itself can get for this specific area. It's much easier when you have a political situation like you did in Bangladesh you know when everybody can come up in arms and say well we've got to raise ten million dollars and they raise a hundred and fifty million dollars. It's not so simple when you're dealing in the Suhail because there's you know first of all they're not an emphasis area that is they're not important strategically to the Western world.

Roscoe 00:11:07.770
And they're about six or seven or and they're for a nation six or seven or eight different nations

Joy Zellner 00:11:12.512
Which would you know in itself is a result so historical. The result of colonialism if you like but if you look at the peoples in terms of you know of tribes in terms of you know culture et cetera they're very much the same. You know they're very much the same so that you know we don't. But the people themselves are recognizing that dealing with six or seven different nations had you know produced problems for them in bilateral aid. They got together and formed an organization which is the into the permanent Interstate Committee for the drought relief so that they could as one you know go to the donor bodies which would include the United Nations organizations the World Bank. And you know in several governments including you know the individual European governments as well as the European Economic Community as well as the United States to look for aid and to look for aid not only for their individual countries in an emergency period but also in the long term for reconstruction because you'd have to think in terms of redeveloping the whole area for it to survive. You know when you think of building a dam you're not going to build a dam for the Gambia alone. You know where they're less than half a million people. You think of building again a dam on the Senegal River which would serve not only Mauritania and Senegal and The Gambia but also Mali. And then you think of the Niger River and you think you build a dam there that would serve Niger Upper Volta and perhaps Chad. You know in that sense the countries themselves have done something about coming together and looking for regional redevelopment. You know there's the strengthen unity which is also what we've seen rains

Roscoe 00:12:42.672
And how much has the United States actually given? I think that's a very important point because I know Congressman Diggs of the Black Caucus has been pressuring our own government to do more and in some ways I've heard at least that the government has been more responsive in other ways. I've heard that as much as possibly 60 or 70 percent of what the United States is providing is really in terms of administrative cost.

Joy Zellner 00:13:09.270
Well this is what you know. One has to understand what aid is you know a lot of people think of terms when they hear aid they think that the United States says OK we vote 200 million dollars for the Suhail and 200 million dollars is immediately transferred into the sales coffers and the civilians can use that aid does not work that way. Aid states for example will give you 50 million dollars but 50 million dollars it would also pay for the administration of the 50 million dollars which has to be administered by Americans. Fifty million dollars it would also pay for programs that Americans approve of. We also pay for American material. So you're not really as free as you sound when you people say they give you aid. I'll give you a very very good example of the kinds of how aid is computed a million dollars was given to M.I.T. to do research into reconstruction in the Suhail and the reasons et cetera et cetera M.I.T. with all its fantastic reputation has no experience in the Suhail but a million dollars was given to that organization. They did a report that you know which neither aid nor anybody else is going to use but that million dollars is going to be computed as aid to the Sahara. You know for this 1974 75 season 50 million dollars originally which was supposed to be for the Suhail but it's now going to be for aid to Africa. So it means not only Suhail the but it means Ethiopian means Somalia means the Sudan and now Tanzania and other countries that are also having drought are going to share in this 50 million dollars for total. I know I would hate to give a figure right now because I think it's somewhere around 200 million dollars for the total period. It may have been computed from the very first in 1964 65 when they gave food aid to Mali. So I really don't know how it's computed but it's something like two hundred million dollars total. But people should remember it's not 200 million dollars it was transferred from U.S. Treasury into Suhalian coffers.

Roscoe 00:14:54.781
And then of course there are other problems even if the money were transferred directly into the hands of the various governments there is the question of actually getting what you buy what you pay for. In other words getting the food getting the grain getting sorghum and so on getting it there and then getting it distributed because one of the things that I had heard was that even where grain was delivered to the countries either by plane or by boat that there was difficulty in getting it moved into the inner parts of the country part of it because the populations were nomadic and part of it because the roads just disappeared in another part of it because there were very few landing areas.

Joy Zellner 00:15:36.610
Yeah. Well that's very true. But just because you're dealing with underdeveloped infrastructure to you know if you take into you know if you take 100 million tonnes of grain into the port of Dakar there's only one railroad station that runs from Dakar to Bamako in Mali which is a 600 mile stretch but I'll take you a week and it's a very small gauge railroad. So we're dealing with really outmoded systems and even where roads do exist they're very few and far between and those are of you know of grain that can be used all year round. And the others are just dirt roads. And when it rains you know they're not usable. You see you're dealing with a people who inherited an infrastructure that was almost nonexistent. These are poor countries you know in 60 and 90 years of colonialism some areas did not develop this made me even poorer. Exactly. It did make them even poorer because part of the reason to today they're suffering from this kind of drought and this kind of thing is that they moved from subsistence farming which provided the usual barter system between normal and farmer to crop production for export and to model crop production for export. So that in times of one one crop it come on crop economies you know and so that when not only when the when the price on the world market went down for peanuts for example they suffered you know people are not using as much peanut oil as they used to. So they suffered from that but it was very difficult to convert back. They produced only cotton so you don't eat cotton you know and you can't eat peanuts all the time. So we're really dealing with a very difficult situation. You know historically and I think people ought to try to understand that no one is blaming anyone but they blame can be placed on the ex colonial governments.

Roscoe 00:17:06.630.0000000001164
And tonight on sole of reason we are talking with joy Zellner of rains the organization relief for Africans in need in the Suhail And we're talking about the situation in this wide area of West Africa and is going into Central Africa now and the fact that literally hundreds of thousands of people pass with millions of people are in danger of starvation or certainly malnutrition. And we've also looked at what the United Nations has been doing what the federal government and the United States has been doing. But now Joy let's talk about what individuals can do. I know that a number of black people and white people in black and white organizations that are concerned. They are aware of the tragedy. They are somewhat informed. One of the things we've been trying to do this evening is to help every one of us to become a little bit more informed about the situation situation is certainly very serious. It has certainly natural consequences because it is in a sense a tragedy of nature but more than that it's a tragedy of politics and tragedy of economic exploitation. But yet we have these people here we have these countries where there is need for technical development so that they can restore their crop restore their cattle herds and so on. What can the average citizen or the average organization do. Because we talked about the folly of bringing cans of Campbell's soup and Del Monte beans and so on and sending them because that really doesn't deal with the issue. It doesn't deal with the issue it cost an awful lot of cost off a lot and not a lot of the people in these countries probably don't don't even any kind of I don't know basically a diet is sort of a grain protein diet. I imagine they use a certain amount of meat and I imagine you know we see those countries they use a fairly substantial amount of fish.

Joy Zellner 00:19:00.430
That's true but in those particular countries that we're dealing with they're only about three of them that have a sea coast. You know that's true. Sending out Mali and Mauritania Senegal and the Gambia and Mauritania that have a seaport for the rest of them are inland landlocked countries and generally the diet consists of milk and sorghum and they do have some fish from the lakes. But those most of those dried up too. So you know we're working with that problem too. But I think the individual can do a lot. One of the things that has never happened about Africa is the sort of pressure on the U.S. government which in effect is the only person that can you know give that huge amount of aid that are necessary really for the reconstruction of this whole area. I think pressure on the U.S. government for more aid to Africa. You know one of the things that I find very disheartening and as an African myself and having lived in this country for a long time is that there's no Africa lobby. You know the slightest thing that happens in the Middle East there's a definite Arab lobby. This is definitely no lobby. There used to be a China up there still is a China that you know there's a Vietnam lobby and everybody has a lobby. But Africa does not have a lobby and it seems to me terribly unfortunate because when you talk in terms of minority groups you know every group every ethnic group in the United States has formed sort of some sort of a political lobby for its homeland. And when you think that there are over twenty five million sons of Africa who are citizens of the United States and who built the United States it's almost unbelievable that this is the one continent that does not have a lobby you know. And you know people talk about minorities I don't think of the black community as a minority group at all. You know they they are the majority among minorities. If you you know if you take you know if you're talking about ethnic groupings and we're very highly visible grouping and we ought to use it and I think if we used it for Africa we could use it just as effectively for the United States. I think this is one thing that groups can do get involved with your government in terms of writing to them in terms of calling them up in terms of sending a telegram in terms of showing some sort of interest as to what they are doing in Africa.

Roscoe 00:21:05.360
All right. I think that some explanations for that and that is for a longer time quite possibly a large number of blacks were not as consciously aware of the importance of the African heritage as they should have. Another course is that so much of the energies of blacks in America has been devoted to beating off the oppressive legal racism know transportation food and this type of thing. But certainly in 1975 there really is no literal excuse for the absence of as you say an African lobby but you see the lobby what can be done to develop one for example what are some of the what would some of the goals or objectives of an Africa lobby be. What were they asked for. Or would they type of things we could demand of our government

Joy Zellner 00:21:48.982
One of the things we could demand most effectively end immediately. Well first of all we're talking we take the problems of Southern Africa politically the United States has never come out and made a statement on you know on its its attitude towards liberation in Southern Africa the United States you know dragged its feet for a long time even over the Suhail. You know these are things that should not be allowed. And I think I see it all as a continuum you know legal racism here it's translated differently in Africa but it's the same attitude that produces it. It's the same attitude that produces non involvement of the United States in Southern Africa and Southern African problems. It's the same attitude that makes the chrome issue with Rhodesia. It makes it you know just disappear. You know there was a lot of talk about it and then all of a sudden it comes out of committee and then we hear no more it's been shelved you know for the time being this is the sort of thing that even our own black congressmen need to know that their communities are interested enough for them to push you know and I don't see you know what an African lobby is being just uniquely for Africa. You know it's enlightened self-interest. You know this is the way I see it. And I think what we can do with a lot of intellectuals around and people to me to talk when you say why aren't you doing X Y Z about Africa. They say but we have problems here. But the problems here are produced by the same attitude. You know this is what I like to push. You know that it's it's nothing new racism whether it's here or whether it's in Africa is the same thing. It's two sides of the same coin you know.

Roscoe 00:23:20.820
And if that is the issue and I think you're right at that point how do we get better mobilization around these issues. I certainly I think the famine in the Suhail has provided a focus. I think that everyone white people black people do respond to the picture of a starving child. We understand that. And whereas maybe some might not be quite as aware of the political ramifications they are aware certainly of the human ramifications. What specifically can we black Americans and those others who want to join us demand in terms of the United States participation in the Suhail. I want more money. One more money.

Joy Zellner 00:24:09.020
I think no one is more money more money for the sale. Fifty million dollars is not going to reconstruct the city. It's not going to reconstruct Africa. It's not going to do very much more. We need far more money for reconstruction of the Suhail.

Roscoe 00:24:22.340
I think that's what's a good target because I think politically when you say well look we want. We want you to put up 200 million this year 300 I think.

Joy Zellner 00:24:30.170
I think 200 million is a realistic.

Roscoe 00:24:33.381
You know I've heard figures of upwards of 500 million five hundred million.

Joy Zellner 00:24:37.551
I'm being very very conservative if you like because I know that we can ask for one billion dollars but we're not going to get one billion.

Roscoe 00:24:46.530
One other thing is that close to it in a underdeveloped economy a massive influx of money and resources sometimes isn't even possible because of the fact that it gets blocked because of lack of technicians lack of ability receives

Joy Zellner 00:25:02.571
you know even you know all of those things stay. They all sound very good. But you see if you have the money you can buy the technology you can buy the technicians you know everybody else is buying the technicians the countries of the Middle East lack all of this too but because they have oil money they're buying this now you know they're beginning to buy they're buying it and you know they're buying it from the United States they're buying it from Europe they're buying it from all over. We can buy too given

Roscoe 00:25:24.471
Oh certainly we can I will. I wasn't suggesting that we can't. But in terms of this continuum from 50 million to

Joy Zellner 00:25:31.162
Look at it this way 50 million for all of it for all of Africa it is a very limited you know. The impact is very little. Sure. If you take 50 million dollars and you put it into the economy of Upper Volta it'll make an enormous impact but that 50 million dollars is not going into the economy of a vote alone. It's going into the economies of 30 other African states.

Roscoe 00:25:51.001
Well basically in terms of this pressure that we want to develop in the black community for more United States involvement in Africa and as the is one which you believe focuses around Suhail getting more money to be able to buy either more food or more technical aid or both.

Joy Zellner 00:26:10.830
I think it's both. I think immediately the emergency food situation will continue for the next year or two. That's that's the very minimum that we do need. But I think it'll be very much more needed in terms of the technology needed to reconstruct to build those huge dams to build the roads to build the airstrips to build medical facilities to build schools. You know these are the kinds of things we're talking about and I think it's very much in our own self-interest to get involved in that. And I think it also continues that the kinds of pressures you build for the Suhail can also be used for movement in Southern Africa to see the United States do something positive about southern Africa now and it comes right back home to doing something about those areas that are suffering from this economic squeeze you know from those areas that are suffering from lack of

Roscoe 00:26:54.151
Are there any specific actions that are projected in terms of political activity on the part of the United States in southern Africa?Are there anything that specifically we could demand in relationship to southern Africa?

Joy Zellner 00:27:09.600
I think pressure on the South African government

Roscoe 00:27:11.731
To do what?

Joy Zellner 00:27:12.420
To do something about Namibia. They're now talking of dividing Namibia up into bantustans. You know they really don't have a right to do that. You know the record of the United States voting in the United Nations on site in southern Africa is really disgraceful. And I think we ought to do something about that too.

Roscoe 00:27:28.410
In other words what you really are pleading for and as you say it's enlightened self-interest is for more black involvement in the whole continent of Africa. It's not only the Suhail but also South Africa.

Joy Zellner 00:27:40.950
We also need funds and people who have you know the inclination to send money to please send whatever they can to rains 475 Riverside Drive New York 100270 call 8703151.

Roscoe 00:27:59.820
All right I'd like to thank Joy Zellner of Reines for being our guest on tonight soul of reason.

Outro 00:28:04.201
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department. In cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

