Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.140
Fall is the time of the theater, and Blacks are on the forefront of New York theater. Hear Joan Sandler of the Black Theatre Alliance discuss happenings in Black theater in New York on tonight's SOUL OF REASON.

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:32.890
This is SOUL OF REASON, a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:59.440
With us tonight on SOUL OF REASON is Joan Sandler, executive director of the Black Theatre Alliance. Glad to have you with us tonight, Joan.

Joan Sandler 00:01:05.260.9999999999927
Very happy to be here, Dr. Brown.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:06.631
Now tell us about the Black Theatre Alliance. We know just how outstanding Black theater is in New York; and the Black Theatre Alliance plays a very, very important role in keeping Black theater as vibrant as it is. As a matter of fact, I think your motto is Black theater is alive and well in the neighborhoods of our town.

Joan Sandler 00:01:24.940
That's right. And all over town, we're basically a support and service organization that got started with Black theaters who realized that if you come together as a collective, you can achieve some of the things you may want to achieve, especially through a sharing process. That was a point of maturity, about four years ago, we came into existence. I came on as the hired hand about two years ago and have been trying to -- through the help of a very supportive board and a very wonderful group of artists --make certain programs happen that will keep our theaters alive.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:59.080
Of course, it's very interesting that you've mentioned it's a point of maturity, to ... for these Black theater groups to come together. Maybe you can enlarge on that. I happen to know some of the background of it, but maybe you might enlarge on it for our audience.

Joan Sandler 00:02:10.509.99999999998545
Well, I think when we had a lot of Black theater happening in the 60s -- and there was a little money to make it happen with -- I think people got off on their own personal trips, and that it wasn't until a point of six or seven years later that artists began to really talk to each other much more; and also came to the conclusion that if you share your information and you begin to think of sharing some of your resources, so you put in something into a central place, nobody is going to rip you off. I think this happened in the history of theater in a relatively short time. And through that, seven theaters were able to come together initially as a Black Theatre Alliance over ... over four years ago. We're almost going into our fifth year of existence.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:55.240
I think you're saying the problem was ego and money, that so long as there was money out there and people were competing for the attention, many of the Black theater groups were in really harsh competition with each other and didn't do the type of helping that they're doing now through the Theatre Alliance. So in one sense, the paucity of money has brought about a new kind of creativity, which has helped Black theater to rise to new heights in New York City.

Joan Sandler 00:03:21.820
I think that's an underlying factor. I think at the time the Alliance theaters came together, there was perhaps even still some funds out there for Black theaters. But I think at the same time, one had the feeling of what we were going into in terms of Black arts movements, in terms of Black community based programs of all kinds and services to the community, that we would have to come together, and that you ... one is looking at 10 and 20 years from now. So we're not a renaissance period on the map for 10 years, and that's the end of it. Since there's always been a continuity in the Black theater experience in America, you know.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:02.910
Okay, we'll talk about that continuity a little later, but I thought we might mention some of the groups in the Black Theatre Alliance: the Afro-American Singing Theatre, directed by Ed Taylor; the Afro-American Studio Theatre for Acting and Speech, directed by Ernie McLintock; the Afro-American Total Theatre, Hazel Bryant; The Bed-Stuy Theatre, Delano Stewart; ...

Joan Sandler 00:04:22.631
Our founding president.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:23.051
...Black Vibrations. I just ... I'll just take a smattering because there are just so many now: The Cornbread Players; The Demagogues; East River Players; Brownsville Lab; New Heritage Repertory Theatre; Theatre Black; Urban Arts Core; Voices, Inc.; West Khumba Theatre; on and on and on...

Joan Sandler 00:04:43.600
Right. Some of them are in Brooklyn [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:45.591
[CROSSTALK] really says why theater is so vibrant. Which then gets us into the question of this explosion of Black theater, which you're going to project sometime in the month of November in the ... your annual festival. Could you tell us about that? What its purpose is? And how it operates and so on? [CROSSTALK]

Joan Sandler 00:05:05.411
Right. This is our fourth annual festival. We are going to be doing a fantastic festival this year. I don't even know how to even begin. We're going to be showing...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:15.340
Anything you do is fantastic. [LAUGHTER] This is going to be super fantastic.

Joan Sandler 00:05:18.270
You're wonderful! But we're growing and the artistic resources are growing. And we're just trying to find a way. It's a magazine format. But at the same time, it takes a chunk of Black theater in New York and say, hey, we are here for a month; we're twenty-five theaters; we do a lot of different things among ourselves; we're having four children's matinees; we're having prices that people in the neighborhood could pay; we're having, hopefully, people who are gonna come as far as St. Albans to the Harlem Cultural Council, which was formerly the New Lafayette Theatre, to see a month of Black theater and to see what all the companies that you've mentioned here, and some others, are going to be doing.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:58.000
Now, this is going to be located where physically?

Joan Sandler 00:06:00.620
Okay, we're going to be at the Harlem Cultural Council Center at 137th Street, on Seventh Avenue, just off 137th Street. We're going to run Wednesdays through Sundays, 7:30 curtains, matinees for children at two o'clock on Saturdays. And we will also have our special Gala evening, which is November 29th, which is a retrospective of Black theater in America based on the American Negro Theater -- the ANT movement, which existed from 1938 to almost 1952...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:37.580
Roger Furman, I think is the producer... the director of that particular event?

Joan Sandler 00:06:40.430
That's right. That's right. You're right.

00:06:42.961
Roger's been on our show a couple of times and he's talked about the vibrancy of Black theater, as has Ernie McLintock and Virginia Capers and so many of the other folk -- Doug Ward -- who have been in to Black theater because Black theater is so closely related to Black life. It really is, in a sense, our mirror on one hand, and our "star of hope" on the other hand. And what you're doing in this month is sort of bringing it all together for it to happen. Now on any given night, will you have excerpts of different plays or will it be a particular play put on by particular theater group at that time?

Joan Sandler 00:07:18.450
Each evening will be a full length play by a particular company. And in many cases, we'll be premiering new works that have never been done before, and that's exciting. There will be several evenings where we will introduce our more recent members of the Black Theatre Alliance, such as Al Phan [phonetic]; The Cecil Alonzo Players; The Frederick Douglass Creative Arts Workshop, who will be doing short plays so that we'll have an evening where there will be some one act-ers happening. Again, original works, or improvisational works, as well as some plays that have been seen in the past before. Then we have a rather special evening because of our Frank Silvera Writers Workshop, where we're going to have two evenings of theater works in progress of some new plays that have come out of that unit, which will be exciting. Tickets will be available at the box office. General admission is three dollars. The Theatre Development Fund voucher, which a lot of people don't understand, and we have to get the word out more in the community about it, which makes tickets available at a dollar, will be available if you just call our office. And I can give you that number.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:25.550
All right, could you give us the number of your office?

Joan Sandler 00:08:27.210
Sure, 245- 8125, The Black Theatre Alliance. Especially if you want to be in touch about the subsidized ticket, which allows people to get to the theater for a dollar; as well as all other information. Can I also say that in "Theater Notes" weekly in the AMSTERDAM NEWS, we run a column and a calendar of what's happening in Black theater throughout New York. A major focus of this column during November, of course, will be the Festival, because that's what's gonna be happening. Not to say that there aren't going to be some other productions happening. They'll be happening all over the city simultaneously.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:59.910
Because basically the Theatre Alliance focuses on neighborhood theater. So there's, you know, Roger Furman, and New Heritage Repertory up on 125th Street; and then there's The Bed-Stuy Players over in Brooklyn ... The East River Players over on the east side and all kinds of things are happening in theater. And one of the things that we really try to do through SOUL OF REASON and through our various communications activities is to let the public at large -- both the white public and the Black public -- know about these fantastic theaters. Because in a sense, many of the critics feel that Black theater is the most vibrant thing that's happening in the theater. And maybe we could talk about that for a little bit. Why is it felt that Black theater is so vibrant and is such an important leader in the field of theater in New York and in the nation, in a sense?

Joan Sandler 00:09:58.740
Well, in a way, I wish the critics felt it more and ... and really did the job on it [CROSSTALK]

00:10:03.031
When I was referring to critics, I was really referring to Black critics and Black scholars because one of the things we talk about a little later is the whole question of criticism of theater and how it is basically dominated by a particular school of thought, not just a particular race, but a particular school of thought. But we were talking about scholars and creative activists and things of this type who were pointing to the leadership role of Black theater.

Joan Sandler 00:10:29.280
That's right, our creative people who are really tuned into Black theater. First of all, I think we've created... what has happened, we have a generation of exciting playwrights that's come about; and we have also a generation of both actors and directors who are trying different things in the theater that ... I don't even know where to begin to say what makes us so unique and what gives us the kind of impact that we're beginning to have on theater in general in America.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:00.940
Could we suggest that possibly it comes from the Black experience itself? [CROSSTALK]

Joan Sandler 00:11:04.443
Yes, that's where I was going to go with it, right. [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:04.455
Both the oppression and the vibrancy, and the fact that we've been outside for so long, we haven't necessarily learned all of the traditions that much of theater is trying to break away from.

Joan Sandler 00:11:18.650
And so we have created something new. And I think we also are a people who come out of, certainly what has been, a very rich cultural experience. We have given America our culture that it has not been able to kind of foster itself. So we bring our total experience, whether or not it's from music, whether or not it's from the language that we speak among ourselves. And as you say, just the totality of a special experience, unfortunately, based in an oppression kind of history, but that somehow our growth and our strength has added some new things that America has never experienced. And I think the theater just reflects this. I think our literature reflects this.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:00.900
This is part of the pluralism of the American experience, in a sense. And if we look back at the turn of the century, it was a tremendous amount of input from the Irish immigrants into theater particularly from people like O'Neill. And then more recently in the 40s and 50s, tremendous import from the Jewish experience, particularly the introspective analytical type of experience. And now in the 50s and 60s and then the 70s, we have this explosion of Blacks with all of this talent and in a sense, all of this anger, all of us frustration, breaking out in these various art forms. The type of sets that are used, particularly the use of music and dance in theater. As a matter of fact, sometimes it's difficult to differentiate between what might be classical theater and what might be classical dance, because as you go from the whole range of Arthur Mitchell and Ballet and Alvin Ailey over to what Doug Ward, or Roger Furman, or anyone, or Ernie McLintock are doing in their theaters. So that in a sense, Black theater does set the pace. On the other hand, as it sets the pace, it's going through a number of financial agonies, which I think is one of the things that the Black Theatre Alliance is trying to deal with. And how do you try to deal with some of those things?

Joan Sandler 00:13:26.020
I'm glad you asked that question, because we've been trying to deal with it in a variety of ways. We're not a funding organization to other Black theaters; though we do have some, I think, important programs which are modest at this point, such as an emergency loan program so that people can deal with their smaller cash flow problems. We're looking at the area of management because there's a lag between our management expertise in the theater field as compared to the artistic thing, which has just mushroomed and grown all over the place. There are some central services that are just too expensive and too difficult to come by for the individual theater, such as a press agent's service, such as a theater technical training program in theater crafts; and a writers workshop now which is beginning to foster a whole new crop of writers, we feel; as well as be supportive of some of the writers that have been out there. And we're dealing with a critique process there, which is important. Our services are more in the managerial administration and development area. We're trying to develop new sources of money. We're trying to systematically make that information available to our companies as well as be available to each other on an individualized level where we can share. We are talking about a national touring network across the country because we've identified over twelve Black theaters who have viable box office houses and we can tour with each other. So that means we've made a commitment to share something. We're sharing the space, we're sharing part of the expense for traveling. And we're saying, you know, let's go. We got to hook up the network because there is a network in regional theater. There's a network in the commercial theaters through the Shubert's and other commercial organizations. So we're looking at what's going to work for us. And I don't think we could've done this three or four years ago.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:13.090
And I think it does represent a tremendous drive forward. But beyond that, I was thinking what the individual Black person in the community can do to help support Black theater. Certainly emotional support, certainly attending; but is anything that Blacks or whites who are interested in this might do financially in some type of organized way to support Black theater. I know a few months ago they were trying to put one of the Black plays on Broadway and they're trying to raise money from people in the Black community. And so many of the folk were hesitant. So many of the Black folk were hesitant to put in that three hundred dollars or that five hundred dollars or that thousand dollars [CROSSTALK]

Joan Sandler 00:15:56.301
To move a play [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:57.940
To move a play. Now, what can we do about that? Are you in the Theatre Alliance doing something about consciousness raising, about this or helping people to understand what this type of an investment means? Because generally speaking, theater investments aren't good investments.

Joan Sandler 00:16:10.280
Right. I know. I know you have to do it for love. And in a way, you have to advocate what is a love for an art form and to feel that the artists -- as a church, and any other part of the community -- is this very special, soul saving, nourishing part of the community. And theater as a very visible form, is still new to many of us as Black people, except when it begins to come out in the name of the top star or the Broadway show. But to understand that this is a growing institution within the community or relates to the community that needs support. It means bring a friend. It means see a Black play a month at least, you know, if you've seen just one last year. It means beginning to look for -- and we try to make it as accessible as possible -- what that information is. Substitute a play for a movie, because we know the movies got it covered. And also understand that when you get a star like a Ron O'Neal who came out of SUPER FLY, the Ron O'Neal is part of something that came out of our theater community and who relates back to it and that his growth as an artist has come out of that experience. And somehow we're looking for ways to make this statement and and to show the connection, the connective tissue between this kind of experience. I think we need lots of small commitments as well as those people who have that extra contribution that can be made or can share contribution to all of our theaters, which are not-for-profit operations.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:40.850
Of course you made a very good point about what individuals can do: just little things; just reorganizing their lives a little bit. But there still is the question about how, or whether, Black people in collective groups, or individually, might contribute to a play. For example, let's just take one of these off-Broadway plays. Probably it takes twenty five or thirty thousand dollars at the very least, to get it together. Now, that's twenty five people at a thousand dollars each or it's 250 people...

Joan Sandler 00:18:16.731
...at 500...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:17.991
That's right. So how do you... have you done anything about that? Are you getting people to think about that?

Joan Sandler 00:18:24.890
Well, I think that the bulk of our work is at the theater before it moves a production to the commercial world. And that if our people knew that THE WINE-SELLER was available free of admission at a little theater on East 3rd Street before it came to Lincoln Center, that the knowledge of that experience and being able to share this experience... that COPE came out of a 50 seat theater Vinnette Carroll has, you know that EL-HAJJ MALIK, which ran off-Broadway years ago, came out of 126th Street, the Elks building, where it could have been seen for three dollars. So that when a show moves, then there is a chance to pay the actors better, there's a chance to get better sets, and it's going to cost ten times as much money. You create that production for two thousand and you move to off-Broadway and it's thirty, forty, fifty thousand dollars. And yes, we do encourage people to make that investment in a show when it moves commercially. That's not ... our target work area is the area of sustaining the operation before the show moves commercially so that one can build something to move commercially. And getting into the world of investments, and an investment in the production, is a slightly different world for us. Even though we do... we're always involved with it because each year there are several potential commercial hits among our twenty five theaters that do move to off-Broadway, in some cases to Broadway, or to Lincoln Center, or to a national touring circuit. But we're trying to raise the consciousness at the smaller operation level. Because once it does get to Lincoln Center, it's visible.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:10.310
And as you say, people in the New York community can find out about what's happening in Black theater by looking at "Theater Notes" in the AMSTERDAM NEWS and also contacting the Black Theatre Alliance at 245-8125, for information about any one of these things, particularly the festival, which is going to run through which dates?

Joan Sandler 00:20:29.900
November 6th through December 1st at the Harlem Cultural Council Then the first Wednesday in December, we open at the Storefront Museum in South Jamaica and we will have a series of five to six productions there. We'll be featuring our member theaters; we'll be also featuring a member theater from Philadelphia that has a very exciting young people's show. Viney Burrows is going to do an evening at the Storefront Museum. It's just a range of things happening. And I want to urge people to think in terms of theater parties: don't just come yourself, bring your family, bring your class, if you're students come because we do have these tickets available for a dollar. And there's some theater for everybody. Not everybody's gonna like everything.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:19.330
That's a very interesting point. I was going to ask you about some of the themes, because, at least in the late 60s and early 70s, so much of the theme of Black theater was anger and a tremendous emphasis on profanity, which some people said just reflects the truism of the Black experience; but some others said reflected an opportunity just to act out a little bit. But now there seems to be a much wider range of themes in Black theater; many of them related to the Black family; many of them related to Black love; many of them related just to introspection of individual Black people. What is the range of themes that we can expect to see in this festival?

Joan Sandler 00:22:02.830
I think it'll be the range of life. We have some comedies that are going to be going up in this festival. [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:12.611
[CROSSTALK] Could you give us a name of one of them, just as an example?

Joan Sandler 00:22:12.626
[CROSSTALK] I have to plug back because in some cases we're confirming shows. And if I can just go back thematically. We're doing a range from a Mama Baraka, a Richard Wesley, some older work by James Baldwin, possibly the HAND IS ON THE GATE, which is an evening of poetry experience, which is so beautiful and a magnificent piece. It's a classic! [CROSSTALK] And some of our theaters see what is the literature of Black theater -- that's classical literature for the theater. Then there's some new experimental things being done and love themes. I won't even begin to try to name the plays, [CROSSTALK] because we're going to confirm that next week anyhow. And there should be flyers around the city as well as a mass mailing that's going out, as well as looking in the paper. And then hopefully they're going to be some radio spots towards the last two weeks before we open. And so the publicity will be out there. I just say it's exciting. And don't just support a festival, but support the theaters that are going to be having shows simultaneously. Roger Furman is opening an old play ON STRIVERS ROW written by Abraham Hill in 1938, which is timely and it's going to be funny, and is part of today, and serious at the same time.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:43.330
Well, what about criticism of Black theater? We mentioned that earlier and we were saying that frequently the criticism that appears in the white press, by some of the prestige critics, isn't either too perceptive or too conducive to wanting to continue on. On the other hand, we find some white critics being so intimidated by some Blacks in the theater who say, well, you don't know anything about being Black. So how in the world can you criticize Black theater? What's happening in the area of criticism of theater?

Joan Sandler 00:24:20.350
Very little and not enough, and it's area we're alarmed about. It's an area that our theaters are alarmed about, our artists are alarmed about. And I think as as a collective organization, we've got to make some constructive moves in this area of the fact that they're not even Black freelance critics working for the major papers that are reviewing theater constantly. The fact that even our own press has to do more. And James Murray has been very helpful as a step towards the AMSTERDAM NEWS, as well as Diane Weathers over at NEW YORK AGE in terms of just expanding a whole arts section around it. I think there's the need for pressure and there's a need for a constructive path that the media can begin to pick up on it. Because we plan on being here for a long time.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:09.970
Well, we have been here for a long time.

Joan Sandler 00:25:11.390
That's right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:11.761
And we're going to be here and be much stronger. And I think part of the maturity of any profession is to have people who chronicle -- in a critical, evaluative way -- what's happening. As a matter of fact, that might be one endeavor of The Black Theatre Alliance: to begin to get together some workshops to help do some consciousness raising among both Blacks and whites who are interested in drama criticism, particularly a criticism of Black drama.

Joan Sandler 00:25:40.050
Right. Because I think we have the writers and the analysts who are there... I think we have the people who can do the job, who have not had the consistent opportunity to do this job so that it gets in print, and to be recognized also by the major papers. Because basically the white critics' community is directly plugged into every aspect of work happening in white theater. And that by the same token, the same critic says, well, I can go and see a Black play and understand that, but the underpinnings of that, all the things that have led up to that -- that shapes... that defines that work as an artistic entity -- is totally missed because they're not having another bigger sharing experience with the Black artistic community, which they have with their own.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:25.210
Well, let me ask you one last question: what about Black theater on Broadway? Should Black theater be on Broadway? Should some of the works of these neighborhood theaters eventually end up on Broadway? Because I know that Doug Ward over at the Negro Ensemble Company had a problem with whether he was going to take THE RIVER NIGER there. And he finally did, and it was a big hit. And then at the same time he had a lot of criticism. What do you think about that?

Joan Sandler 00:26:50.110
I think Broadway is important. I think that everything should go to Broadway and I think that should not be the principal goal of a person who is developing a play... is looking at Broadway. Broadway is sometimes a good outlet because suddenly when three thousand Black people may have seen your play in a little theater over a three month period, you move it to Broadway and you have possibly five thousand people a week, who are Black, seeing this play. And that's been one of the advantages. [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:15.630
[CROSSTALK] And Black people are now going to Broadway. [CROSSTALK]

Joan Sandler 00:27:17.401
Yes, hoping that they can begin to relate from whence that came, that they could relate to the St. Mark's Playhouse... or they could relate to Ernie McLintock or Hazel Bryant and the other theaters. By the way, we stuff the Broadway plays that are getting predominately Black audiences with information about ourselves. It's important because we know that's an audience that perhaps doesn't understand where some of our theaters are operating, and which we're trying to cultivate them too. And we'll be doing this all season with about three or four Black shows that are coming to Broadway.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:50.370
And of course, you will be having your fourth annual festival, which begins on November 6, and will be at the Harlem Cultural Council at 137th Street and 7th Avenue. And folks who are interested should call what number?

Joan Sandler 00:28:03.690
245- 8125, and we'll be happy to supply all the information and tickets.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:09.720
All right. I'd like to thank you, Joan Sandler of the Black Theatre Alliance, for being our guest on tonight's SOUL OF REASON.

Joan Sandler 00:28:15.241
Thank you so much, Dr. Brown.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:17.490
You've been listening to SOUL OF REASON with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

