Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.700
The stock market goes up. The stock market goes down. Municipal bonds are no longer popular. What does all of this mean to the Black community? Hear Stephen Goodwin, Investment Counselor, discuss the significance of these developments on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:37.641
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:04.580
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Stephen Goodwin, who's an Investment Counselor, Options Specialist, and one of the few Blacks who are on Wall Street. And Steve, as we talk about the market today, those of us in the Black community are certainly concerned about it, because it relates to New York City and it relates to what's happening throughout the world. What really is the status of the stock market today? I'll ask you a little later on. Is it a good thing for Blacks to get into? But, let's talk about just the status of the stock market itself. What is it today?

Stephen Goodwin 00:01:34.190
Well, the actual status of the stock market on a day-to-day basis is more or less contingent upon the financial developments in Washington, D.C. and New York City. Every now and then we hear words such as Arthur Burns decides that, who's the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, that he's going to be a little more flexible in his attitude and his thinking with regard to a financial loan guaranteed in New York City. Any event there is some deterioration in the municipal and corporate bond markets, which is on a day-to-day basis very bullish news for the stock market.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:16.901
Now remember, we're talking to a lay audience and use the term bullish. Now, I know that means a lot down on Wall Street, but it means something else in the Black community sometimes. What are you talking about?

Stephen Goodwin 00:02:28.542
When I speak in terms of bull and bear, which are stock market symbols: bull market means the market is going up, and a bear market means the market is going south.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:40.171
Is going down, in other words—

Stephen Goodwin 00:02:41.306
Right—

00:02:41.307
—we're not doing so well. And, what you're suggesting is that as the New, in particular the New York City fiscal situation, moves from one level to another every day that the Chairman of Federal Reserve Board, Arthur Burns, and other government economists make certain suggestions as to what they think might happen. This is very complicated, and I know that a number of people don't really understand the main thing is being proposed as a kind of a federal loan guarantee. And, some people both in the city and certainly in the Midwest and other places who particularly don't like New York say that this is giving money to New York. Could you explain a little bit what really is intended there and what the impact of this might be on the stock market?

Stephen Goodwin 00:03:31.390
Well, I'm not actually sure how individuals in the Midwest feel that a federal loan guaranteed to New York City in effect is giving money to New York, whereas a couple of years ago the federal government provided a loan guarantee to Lockheed and on a continuous basis our foreign affairs policy is simply subsidizing undeveloped and developed foreign countries who have certain political interests, which may be Democrat, Democratic let's say. So, this is something that the federal government has been doing domestically and internationally for some period of time, and I see no reason why it can't direct its energies to providing a federal loan guarantee to New York City.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:17.500.9999999999709
Now, the loan guarantee as I understand it means that behind each bond that's sold is a guarantee from the federal government, that is the particular municipality can't pay it off, the federal government will pay it off. So, it doesn't mean upfront money from the government, but it does mean the possibility that the government might have to spend this money. And, by having this federal loan guarantee it's my understanding, at least, that this should make the bonds more attractive to investors. They feel that they have less a chance of losing their money; they don't have any chance of losing their money. And as a result of this, the bonds then would become taxable rather than non-taxable, which they are now.

Stephen Goodwin 00:04:56.472
Right. That's correct.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:57.791
So, that's one thing that's into the market. Now in general, would you say that we are in a recession, maybe even a depression? How do you folks on Wall Street look at that? And, particularly being a Black on Wall Street you know just how bad things are in the Black community: fifteen and twenty percent unemployment, and the commitment to civil rights, and the movement of Blacks forward falling apart. So, now when you look at the economy where it looks like the institution of last in, first out is hitting Black people, how do you look at the economy both as a Black person and as a market specialist?

Stephen Goodwin 00:05:40.041
Right. From the vantage of a market specialist in the intermediate sense—that is six months to one year—the market appears, well, the economy appears to be in an up cycle. We've noticed increases in both the corporate and individual incomes. We've noticed increases in production and employment. We've noticed a certain moderation in the inflation rate, because of a reduction in food prices: soybeans, corn meal, etc. We've noticed a reduction also in short and long term money market instruments, which are real very positive signs that, I guess, from the end of August until now put the economy back on a very broad and solid recovery pace. How fast recovery will last and how extensive it will be is questionable, because there is a general thinking that if New York does default to a certain extent it may either abort the U.S. recovery to an extent. That extent is really not known. But, that's probably the only monkey wrench in the whole thing at this point.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:59.790
Well again, looking at the market, why does it appear that the market has really gone down? Why did it go down in the first place? I understand some of it has to do with the oil crisis. And then, why is it turning back up? Because oil, gasoline is still very, very expensive.

Stephen Goodwin 00:07:21.750
Two things here. The market really hasn't reacted negatively toward the news of a possible default on a part of the city. And if you recall, basically, when we had the oil embargo around October third, the Dow Jones industrial average was at the closer to one thousand level.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:44.761
That's correct.

Stephen Goodwin 00:07:45.870
Well, it wasn't until around December 1973 where it finally dropped two hundred points, and then began to move again. Now, the point I'm making here is that in the interim the Middle East countries made it clear that they would increase oil prices by twenty percent and have a five percent cutback in production. Nonetheless, this to a large extent and the most significant extent threw the U.S. economy into a recession. Now, according to the latest statistics from the Council of Economic Advisers they feel that in view of what is happening, and that is the financial crisis of New York City, that we might have an increase in interest rates, that there may be a reduction in municipal spending, and to a certain extent it may be some possible crowding out even [unintelligible] bull markets for other municipalities who have ratings not as good as New York City's. But, the overall consensus is that this will remove one percent from the gross national product. Now, I bring this up only to point out two things, that in certain instances the market may misjudge a crisis, and we could be seeing the same thing here with the possibility looming over us now of a default or our non-default where the market could misjudge it very similar to the way it misjudged the oil crisis. But, at the current time, that is on a day-to-day basis, there is no deterioration in the market either in the corporate markets, the municipal markets, or the equity markets as news from either Washington or from New York State comes out with regard to financial assistance to New York City.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:34.170
But, to translate this into terms that are meaningful to the everyday person in the Black community or in the white community who is out of job—you said the market is turning up and it's about 840, or 860, or whatever happens to be at a given day, and you say things are looking better. Yet, there's still fifteen to eighteen percent unemployment in the Black community. Now, not that you guys on Wall Street are totally responsible for it, but there is some responsibility because of the way in which corporations tend to spend and invest their money. What really does this mean? Does this mean that in six months the unemployment rate is going to drop, or does that mean that the basic federal policy, which is a tight money policy built around a seven percent unemployment, is going to keep us going along at a very slow pace? And, of course if it's seven percent for the country at large, it's fourteen percent—it's double that—for the Black community. So, what about that?

Stephen Goodwin 00:10:30.840
Well, I think the overall unemployment rate has been moving down over the last six months from its near double-digit area. Now, we saw the latest figures that were released for the month of August, I think, put unemployment at 8.6 percent vs. 8.3 percent we saw in the previous month, which simply means that something like—I think an additional I think—it brings the total unemployment around eight million people who are unemployed. What segment of that is Black and white, I really don't know. But, I think that the basic trend here in the labor markets is toward a lower unemployment rate, because as the economy begins to move out of a recession a lot of industries are not even operating at near capacity, and there have been increases in production. So, as companies begin to gear up their sales and increase their production, they begin to hire more and more people. And, the point I'm making here is that as we move out of recovery—and the faster we move out—and the more broad based the economic recovery is—and individual firms whether they be textiles, consumers, autos, whatever particular industry in the economy begin to benefit from this upward move, and there are increases in capacity utilization—and sales move up—and production level step up in alignment with sales, then you have a subsequent increase in the level of employment in these particular places, and this is the benefit.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:03.630
How long does this take though? What's the lag time?

Stephen Goodwin 00:12:05.720
Six to nine months.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:07.430
Six to nine months.

Stephen Goodwin 00:12:07.435
Right. So, if this continues, this means that somewhere around the summer we can expect to see the unemployment rate dipping even more. Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:15.681
But again, and I know this is not necessarily a specialty, but as a Black person who's involved in the market I'm sure you're concerned about it. Again, this raises the question about the viability of the American economic system particularly as it relates to Blacks, because they say Blacks are last in and they're first out, they're first to feel the effects of these ripples—these minor recessions—these ripples, and then of course these great depressions. And, how do you see it as a Black person who's involved in the market? And, how do you think the market sees it, or do they really care because we recognize that basically the market is ninety-nine percent white, and basically these are the people who control our society so that is the way you see it as a person may differ from the way in which the market sees it. Well, right. From a point of view of a Black person who's viewing the stock market or viewing the general economic recovery as it is, I really don't have any encouraging news, because—well, let me step back—If I were a Black professional say coming out of law school today, I think I would focus a great deal of my attention to maybe becoming a legal expert in municipal bonds and going down to Wall Street and seeking employment in a municipal bond house where I would specialize in analyzing the municipal ratings of various municipalities across the country. Now, as a Black person who may be a non-professional or semi-skilled, I really wouldn't know where to tell you where to go or what to do, but I would say I would actually go to those particular industries in the economy where there seem to be the greatest increase in production, for example. Now, when you say that young Blacks might want to look into areas like production and legal analysis of municipal bonds, what you're really saying is that the economy is changing and the Black population better be moving along with these changes. But, this does raise a question about the fact, and maybe this gets back to feeling unfamiliar with education, that so many Blacks do not have the technical skills or educational backgrounds to move into these areas, which still puts it back to the economy, or to the societies more than just the economy, is what does the future hold? What are the next twenty-five or thirty 30 years hold for Blacks? The economy is in trouble. Now maybe you will disagree with me that the economy is in trouble. But, to many of us it appears that the economy is in trouble when you carry even a seven percent unemployment rate. So, how do you see this, because this is very important? It's important to people like yourself in the Black community who are involved in the financial community as well articulate our concerns to some of the people who really run our country, namely the people who have money.

Stephen Goodwin 00:15:09.220
Well, first of all, I am firmly of the opinion whether you're a skilled or unskilled, or a professional or semi-professional that you can do anything you want to do. I happen to think in the financial community where there is tremendous change more frequently than in any other industry, there are more opportunities emerging all the time. For example, with the possibility of default on a part of New York City for the first time we're beginning to see NYSE member firms and municipal bond firms, bound to specialize in the purchase and sale of municipal bonds, developing a research department in municipal bonds. Now, we haven't had this on the street for years, and these are simply people who will just go out and make sure that the ratings are solid, and that certain data available on a given municipality is available—and it is accurate—and it is up to date. Now, anyone who can read or write, or has a desire to get into this, I would just simply suggest you get into it. For example, I'm looking at something myself where on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange they're just beginning to trade what they call Ginnie Mae's, which are government National Mortgage Backed certificates. Now, this has been the first time we've ever had a futures market in what we call Ginnie Mae's. Now, I've dealt in futures before, but this whole area in Ginnie Mae's is gonna be a new one. So, I got on a plane—and I went out there—and I simply just checked it out, and I did that on my own to see whether there really was money to be made in the trading of Ginnie Mae's, and if so, how. But, the point I'm making is that in the financial community, because it fluctuates more in terms of changes in the economy, they're more organizational and structural changes more frequently in this area than there are other industries. Now, other industries that are benefiting from an increased or benefiting from the, I guess, the economic recovery more so than in other industries—for example, the autos begin to look a lot more positive in the first half of 76 than they did in 75. Well, I would simply say that if I had any expertise in dealing with people on any level, I would probably go to the auto industry and seek employment there before I would go to the forest industry, or the leisure group industry. I'm saying this is the way I would be thinking: a) about coming out of school; b) if I was out of school and out of a job right now; or c) if I was in a job and currently unhappy, and I wanted to increase my income prospects, and my upside ability to get ahead. This is where I would go.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:02.430
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is Stephen Goodwin who is an Investment Counselor and Options Specialist with United States Option International, and we are talking about the effects of changes in the stock market and the economy of the nation on the Black community. And speaking of the stock market, of course the whole purpose of stock market is to buy and change, exchange stocks and bonds for profit; both profit for the investor and profit for the salesmen on the street. Possibly Steve, you could tell our audience first what are some good investment possibilities for people in the Black community, and then secondly, you can more or less discuss, you know, how a person who works on the street on Wall Street such as yourself operates. What kind of skills are necessary? How do you make your money, etc.? But, let's talk about first the opportunities for investment in the stock markets. And, I would have to say safe investment for those of us in the Black community, because it is not a large amount of accumulated affluence in the Black community, which we can afford to lose.

Stephen Goodwin 00:19:07.410
Well, in terms of answering your first question, what are viable investments for Blacks, I'm of the opinion that Blacks do not have sufficient capital by which they can actually afford to take certain risk really to stay out of a) the stock market, b) any Black person who has sufficient capital is able to put it in savings banks and savings and loan associations may think a little bit more carefully about putting its investments in maybe municipal bonds or government securities, which are for a higher yield than savings and savings loan associations. However, those Blacks who don't have high risk capital, I would certainly encourage you to stay out of the stock market or out of any other fast moving money markets. Nonetheless, those Blacks who have been for a long time now putting money in the nation's savings and savings and loans might seek better returns with the same degree of safety on their principal by looking in the short term money market obligations or long term obligations.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:16.390
Now, is the option market one of those short term money situations if you're talking about—

Stephen Goodwin 00:20:23.552
The option market is a very fast market and it's a highly leveraged market. You could make a lot of money and you can lose a lot of money.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:34.320
I think that's the key point and that relates to your other point about caution. The market involves the possibility of winning, making money, and the possibility of losing. And, of course, one of the things that people like you want to do is to maximize the possibility of making money and minimize the possibility of losing it. And as you talk about this option money, which is a very fast type of turnover in terms of the time of the operation, you're suggesting that it is both one where one can gain a lot and under the wrong circumstances possibly where one could lose a lot.

Stephen Goodwin 00:21:08.620
You make it very simple in playing the option game, because it's a highly leveraged game and it will be referred to as capital leverage—we're talking about situations where an individual may put up one dollar, but the prospect of making four dollars all before month time period. And, if he's dead wrong perhaps he still get his one dollar back, whereas if he went to OTB he put up one dollar and in less time [laughter]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:37.187
less time it takes to say the name of the horse was [laughter] [crosstalk] He lost it.

Stephen Goodwin 00:21:41.704
He lost one dollar, but then again he might make seven or eight dollars, and it's the same correlation with numbers. You know, people who put up one dollar may have the upside shot of making ten dollars, and in the event they're wrong lose the entire one dollar. So, options is somewhere in the middle of OTB and actually the numbers. At least you get another shot at getting your one dollar back even though you didn't make the four dollars [crosstalk].

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:06.411
Technically or specifically, what is an option market? How does it work?

Stephen Goodwin 00:22:11.731
An option is the right to buy an underlying security over a given period of time at a stated price; i.e., a fifty dollar stock may have a forty dollar option. That is to say, over the next three months, if you were to give me forty dollars you'll be able to buy the stock at forty dollars—and even though the stock is selling at fifty right now. In the event you do not exercise that option—that is you do not decide to convert the option into the purchase of the underlying stock—you lose your entire forty dollars. That is an option, and that is how an option relates to a stock. So, the point here in terms of capital leverage, if you've got a ten dollar stock with a five dollar option over the next four months, we're saying if the stock goes up one point to eleven, that's a ten percent move on the part of the stock. If the option goes up one point from five to six, that it's a twenty percent move on the part of the option. So, you can see given the same numerical move on the upside or the downside on the stock, the percentage change on the option is much greater. So, given very volatile stocks, which I will not name, there is tremendous leverage here and you can make a lot of money.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:39.960
And, the way you make the money is to sell the option to someone else. Is that the way it works?

Stephen Goodwin 00:23:44.610
We either hold it and sell it. It's a very liquid market for options out of Chicago.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:50.910
I see. That's one short way of making money in the market. What's another short term approach to making money on the market? And, then you can tell the audience about the long term approach.

Stephen Goodwin 00:24:01.920
Well, there are a lot of various option strategies that one can put together to more or less maximize his return on a given amount of money. Hey, I just gave you a situation where a person would go out and buy the underlying option on the assumption that the stock was going up. B) you can do various kinds of bullish spreads, bearish spreads, butterfly spreads, a whole variety of things.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:29.230
And that's technical terminology, which means that you do certain things in terms of buying one kind of stock and selling one kind, [crosstalk]?

Stephen Goodwin 00:24:36.450
Right, right. For example, a bullish spread in a given option—you may buy a January thirty five and sell a January forty.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:47.631
Now, January thirty five and January forty, what does that mean?

Stephen Goodwin 00:24:49.851
Right. January. Well first of all, a thirty-five was the strike price—that's the price at which you could buy the stock. January is the expiration period—that's when the options expire. So, if I buy a January thirty-five and I sell a January forty, I'm saying the most I can make is five points. Now, for this privilege of making five points, what do I have to put up? In some cases it may be a dollar, it may be two dollars. But, the whole point is between now and the end of January I've locked in my upside profit—I know exactly where I could break even then—I know exactly how much I can lose. This is what we call a bullish money spreading options. But, there are a whole—there's so many strategies it simply really boggles the imagination.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:36.390
Of course, this points out why it's important that there are people like you who identify with the Black community who are in the market. And, maybe the second part of the question would be of interest to our audience, and that is how does a person like you make your money? Because, I don't know whether you invest in the market, but I do know that a number of people who actually are involved in selling do not necessarily make their money from investment. So how, what profit is this whole process to you?

Stephen Goodwin 00:26:06.240
Well, before I actually came to Wall Street I made a great deal of money in the market. I bought a given stock that was in the high technology area at sixty-five—and it went to ninety-six—and I got out at eighty-six—and I had borrowed about four grand at Cornell and had some other money—and I had made about eight nine—and gave back Cornell their money. So, over an eight-month period I had made about four or five thousand dollars, and I bought a fancy sports car.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:35.121
That was the beginning of the end [laughter].

Stephen Goodwin 00:26:40.051
And, well I really sit around, and I actually conjure up ideas predicated on prosperity, or calamity, or just the national economic trends. For example, I know you all recall when a certain airline was being considered for takeover by the Shah of Iran, or a possible merger with another domestic airline here in the U.S., or even the possibility of being subsidized by the government. Well, the question that emerged to my mind is what kind of financial deal can a person put together where whether the airline was taken over by the Shah, subsidized by the U.S. government, or merged with another airline, money could be made? So, I sit around and think of things like that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:31.320
And, of course, whenever you handle a transaction for a customer, you and your company get a brokerage fee or a transactional—

Stephen Goodwin 00:27:39.182
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:39.961
—which also helps to make it possible for you to make some profit of the market. In summary as we come to the close of our program, what is your opinion about Black people going into the stock market as investment counselors?

Stephen Goodwin 00:27:55.650
Great. Eureka.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:57.271
Now, why is that? What is the reason for saying that?

Stephen Goodwin 00:27:59.701
Well, it's an industry which over the last four years I've seen so many Blacks wiped out. I'd like to see somebody come back.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:08.440
Okay. Well, that's I think that's a good point in which to close our program tonight. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Stephen Goodwin, who is an Investment Counselor and Options Specialist with United States Option International, and we've been talking about the impact on the changes in the financial conditions of the country and Wall Street on the Black community.

