Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:00:01.190
On April 3rd 1974 Dr. John Holloman was installed as president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation. A billion dollar corporation which is the largest health organization in the world. Here Dr. Harlem discussed the accomplishments and problems of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:40.321
This is Soul of reason. A program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:01:06.810
Our guest this evening is Dr. John Holloman who is president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation. Those of us who know him know him as Mike and I would welcome you to the show tonight. Glad to have you.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:01:17.611
Thank you. Thank you Roscoe it's very good to be here. As we were saying and introducing a show that it's been a little over a year that you've been president of this fantastic corporation in attempts to serve the health needs of the New York City population 19 hospitals and a budget of a billion dollars. And as we all know this is quite a pressure cooker of a job. So let's start with some of the positives because there are plenty negatives that we can talk about later. Particularly in terms of budget. Let's talk about some of the positives. What are some of the things that you feel you've been able to do in your year of service as president of this corporation. Well I'd certainly like to stress the fact that the community boards, the medical boards, and the executive directors have been working very closely during the past year with the board of directors of the Health and Hospitals Corporation and although it may not seem to be so we have increased our awareness and concern of our primary mission which is patient care. I think that this is the greatest single accomplishment that I've had. We did succeed in getting all of the community boards in place and we have tackled some of the problems that were existent when I got there. The principal problem that we attacked was a problem of a 55 million dollar revenue shortfall which greeted me on day one and that was followed by 15 million dollar reduction in my base budget as of July 1 that's reduction based spending rate. And we were faced with the demands from the city of New York to cooperate and to help ease the city's fiscal crisis. We were able to contribute in cash twenty eight point nine million dollars in November. We further contributed more than our share when we began to attrit workers from the Health and Hospitals Corporation. We use the attrition route because it was a little less painful than the direct firings and we succeeded in reducing the workforce fill positions by more than 450 since the mayor called for this particular action in January.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:03:41.260
Of course this has caused quite a bit of controversy in the community. It's caused controversy amongst other professionals. Some thinking that you went too far some thinking that you didn't go far enough. Certainly in the minority communities and the poor communities thinking that the corporation was cutting back on services and you made a very cogent point where you said that your cooperation is taking a larger percentage of cut than some of the other service organizations and institutions within the city. And to me this raises a question about the relative value that the residents of the city hold for health. Basically the decisions that are made are made by the power people, the legislators, the people who pay the big real estate taxes, the people who run the banks and so on. And here you are trying to hold up your end. In a sense a free health and hospital system. 19 hospitals and you are swimming upstream as it were. How how do you see this both philosophically as a medical practitioner one who wants to deliver health care and also as an administrator, one who does have to bring in a balanced budget of some sort.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:04:54.150
Well certainly the job is not an easy one and there are many many misconceptions about the Health and Hospitals Corporation. I'd like to emphasize the fact that although we do not turn away anyone who seeks services in the Health and Hospitals Corporation hospitals, all of the care that we render has to be paid for and many times it's paid for very painfully from our own resources which we generate from third party sources and from tax levy which we depend upon for some support. If you will remember, the Health and Hospitals Corporation was created by an act of the legislature. It was designed to free the corporation from some of the bureaucratic encumbrances that had handicapped the old Department of hospitals. And so the corporation was created with a mandated level of tax levy support plus the opportunity to collect and to utilize its third party revenues. This would give the corporation the opportunity to prospectively fund and plan for a rather efficient health care delivery system. But to date the corporation has not succeeded in freeing itself from the entanglements with the bureau of the budget. And consequently we are treated just as any other city agency dependent on tax levy to any extent like to emphasize at this particular point that the system is a very important one to all of New Yorkers. More than 90 percent of all of the emergency medical care rendered in the city of New York is rendered through the ambulances and the emergency rooms of the Health and Hospitals Corporation. More than 50 percent of the ambulatory institutional care that's given is given in these these hospitals. So when we attack or weaken or destroy any part of this institution we are really attacking and destroying the base on which the entire health care delivery system in the city of New York rests. You must remember that we also pay more than one hundred seventy five million dollars to the medical schools and to the volunteer hospitals in the purchase of medical care. So when we're criticized about the level of care that is sometimes given and sometimes the criticisms are justified. The criticisms are misdirected when they're directed at the Health and Hospitals Corporation but they should be directed at the medical schools and at the voluntary institutions with which we are affiliated. There are many many things that we have to overcome, one that we are a charity institution and that we are somehow less worthy. The affiliation contract presumes that the volunteers in the medical schools are better and therefore we are required almost to assume a dependent position and a paternalistic arrangement. All of these we are trying to overcome because we believe that if health care is a right that has to be planned for. We are in the process of negotiating contracts now with the affiliates and we are going to demand a better accounting of the money that we spend. As a matter of fact the fiscal problems that the corporation has been bearing since its inception we're going to ask the affiliates to share with us at least in part during this next go around.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:08:18.790
One question that frequently comes up as to whether the per patient cost in the Health and Hospitals Corporation is higher or lower than the per patient cost in the so-called voluntary hospitals.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:08:30.910
I would like to certainly speak to that point very strongly because the per patient cost is lower in the Health and Hospitals Corporation. You must remember that even when we are reimbursed by. Medicaid that our reimbursement is a total reimbursement including physician services et cetera room whereas the voluntary rate with which we compare ourselves only includes the room and all other charges are in addition there too. So the Health and Hospitals Corporation does deliver services more efficiently. And let me tell you one of the levels in which you can judge the per patient cost and that's in the level of nursing care. We are compared with the volunteers in the northeast area. The standard is five point six nursing hours per patient. And if you apply that standard to the Health and Hospitals Corporation you will find that we are more than two thousand seventy one registered nurses short, more than 500 licensed practical nurses short, more than three hundred and ninety nurse's aide short. Now that's just one category and it's this type of thing that you must be aware of when we are making these comparisons with the voluntary institutions their staffing patterns are much more luxurious, their physicians are paid on the average 35 percent more than the physicians and managers working in our institutions. I'm criticized because I receive a salary of sixty five thousand dollars a year but I would like to suggest that the average salary of a voluntary hospital administrator particularly the ones with which we are affiliated exceeds ninety thousand dollars and wanted to exceed one hundred and twenty five thousand dollars per year just for administering the single institutions plus the fringe packet. That far exceeds our wildest dreams within the Health and Hospitals Corporation. So we we do in comparison with the volunteers and with the medical schools and a dreamily phenomenal and almost fantastic job and utilizing the moneys that we have. Well of course this would suggest to me that literally rather than being cut you need more money. It would also suggest that if you have these deficiencies or these vacancies for nurses and aides and so on that in a sense the quality of care suffers. Now this is not to say that poor care is delivered but certainly if you are deficient in personnel, it would appear that there is going to be something that happens with care. Maybe some of the fringes in terms of hospital care. You know people having nicer rooms and better meals and more attention because the basics of medical care which have to do with the medication physician's care and so on have to be delivered. But what about that because I understand that is a significant problem that you face. Yes I think that we have been discriminated against and I would like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the many, more than 42000 very dedicated employees of the Health and Hospitals Corporation who do a job that is above and beyond the call of duty and who certainly are to be complimented and thanked for their efforts. And I think that this productivity on the part of these employees is the one thing that has encouraged me more since I've been in the corporation since many of the people who look at the corporation look at the days of Department of hospitals when there were reasons for its inefficiency and look at the early days of the corporation when it was getting started. But from the day that the corporation has started, its performance has increased and its improved and it's something that I think can continue. I agree with you that rather than cutting our budget we should certainly be able to plow some of the revenue that we're generating back into the system. I'd like to point out again and emphasize the fact that last year my first year in office we generated one hundred million dollars more in revenue than was generated in the previous year. I'd also like to point out that we did contribute in cash to the city's problems more than 70 million dollars at a time when the city was under collecting its own revenues by one hundred and fifty million dollars. And I ask you a rhetorical question where would the city of New York have been if had not been for the outstanding performance of the Health and Hospitals Corporation during the past year. We are subject to all sorts of criticism and charged with all sorts of abuses but most of them are certainly an unfair evaluation of the overall performance.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:13:28.830
Well this raises a lot of really very serious questions, questions not only relate to health care but related to the way in which the city is run and the way in which services are delivered. Here we are on a budget crisis in New York City and one significant area namely health and hospitals is being asked to cut a time when it is generally believed and you can see that the services that are provided do in a sense fall short of the optimal services. It's almost as though it's suggesting that to live in New York. You have to be prepared to accept less than what you ought to get. I've heard the comparison that says in the city of Chicago they have only one public hospital. Why do we need 19. Why do we need this type of bureaucracy. How do you approach that. Because I know this is a significant problem for administrators of large health organizations.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:14:22.620
Well certainly we have a much greater tradition so far as delivering health care to all of New York. We do have a number of people for whom no other source of care is available. The situation at Cook County has in recent years undergone a significant improvement because the hospital commission has an enlightened attitude that I wish could be adopted by the ruling forces in our city and the way in which they're now treating their public hospitals and the capitation arrangement has been made so that they're able to prospectively fund. The affiliation contracts are more nearly honest, more nearly straightforward. The dependency of the city of Chicago on the corporation is for health care not for generating financial resources.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:15:19.031
Now could you develop that point a little bit.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:15:20.791
Yes I think that the moneys that are given to the to run the hospitals in Chicago are given so that the health care may be adequately planned. The moneys that we've generated during this past year have been essentially taken from us to fill potholes and to compete with the art to help the other agencies that have a number of deficiencies. We are operating in the city of New York certainly in not strict accordance with the legislation that created us. We're not handling our revenues directly as the law states we should. Nor are we doing any of a number of things that we would do if we had the opportunity to prospectively plan for good health care.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:16:00.980
Well who's going to be the advocates for the citizens. Because what you say is really I think a very serious challenge.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:16:08.050
I'm looking for the legislators to have open minds and to be concerned with health care as well as with budgetary problems. I'm anticipating an increase in the workload in the Health and Hospitals Corporation because Jim Thompson commissioner of welfare tells us that the welfare rolls and consequently the Medicaid rolls may increase by as much as 12000 per month starting July. We have responded to the crisis in the nursing homes. We've taken those patients that had been probably mishandled or badly handled in some of those institutions and we've tried to do a job for them. And under the most difficult situation -- conditions. And it's something that's just misunderstood because at one time in the past somebody found a billion dollar organization that there was some waste of some inefficiency which has since been corrected that we are pilloried and maligned and we are really almost on a self-destruct course because very few people realize how important the Health and Hospitals Corporation is to all of the citizens of New York and especially to the health care delivery system.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:17:25.840.9999999998836
On tonight's Soul of reason we are talking with Dr. John Holliman, president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation. We're talking about the accomplishments in his first year of office and also some of the problems that the corporation currently faces. And one of these problems Mike has to do with union contracts. It is alleged that some of the problems that various city agencies face is because of the fact that contracts have been negotiated with the various municipal unions which bind the city to financial commitments which it is no longer able to meet. To what extent is this true in Health and Hospitals Corporation. And to what extent is something being done about it.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:18:07.540
Well I would like to remind all of New Yorkers that the lowest paid workers in many areas are the hospital workers certainly the people who work for us don't make as much money as the people who work in the voluntary institutions. And this is something that we should understand because we must compete and we must be equal to or better than the voluntary institutions and the medical schools and it's very difficult to do when with all the efforts of the Union we are still underpaid. You must remember that it's only in fairly recent years that hospital workers were able to unionize at all. Many of you remember the problems in South Carolina which reflected more recently some of the problems that we'd had here in New York City earlier in which even the bare minimum wages were denied. Hospital workers the people who make a lot of money in providing health care are hardly the average worker or the unionized work in hospitals. I think that physicians do earn reasonable incomes but I would certainly not characterize the union effort in the Health and Hospitals Corporation as being excessive. As a matter of fact, I think that the unions have contributed much to the advancement of the corporation.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:19:28.960
Now another thing that you've tried to instill and move along is the development of community boards. This has been controversial as almost every move getting community involved in municipal and public activities has been. To what extent has this been a success? What are some of the accomplishments that you could say have come out of the Community Board Program.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:19:55.630
Well certainly I think that we are in the process of seeing a lot of good things come from the communities. After several years of trying, we finally gotten all the community boards in place.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:20:11.071
and then with each one of the 19 hospitals

00:20:13.831
19 hospitals does indeed now have a community board.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:20:19.060
This is not different from the board that should be operating any hospital except that our initial stance was such that we restricted at least the legislation and the previous activities of the Board of Directors restricted the activities of the community board. Now the boards are becoming stronger. They're becoming more efficient. They are recognizing their roles largely as patient advocates. They are recognizing their role so far as demanding and lobbying for adequate financing of the hospitals for adequate accountability from the affiliation contracts they are consulting with the executive directors and the medical board so that the needs of the community as a community perceive them can be provided for. Too long we've relied purely on the whims of the professionals. Too long we've been responsive to the bureau of budget. Too long we've been responsive to something other than that which is related to good patient care and I look to the community boards to help us more and more in this area.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:21:22.160
That certainly is the purpose of the community board and seems like a very valid extension of community involvement in public processes. Yet you have heard and I have heard criticism that says you've just added another layer of bureaucracy. You have people who are interested in their own particular little ball game out particular situation and as such inhibit the delivery of health care efficiently rather than accelerate it. How do you deal with the question like that.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:21:50.490
It requires my administration having to take the extra step. But it also generates a very strong ally. Once we take that extra step and once we allow the democratic process to work. When we finally come out with a position, it's a much stronger position than it's one which I should dream up or which the medical board should dream up or which the executive director should dream up. It may take a wee bit longer and may take a little bit more effort but I can assure you it's worthwhile. Communities are not served until they perceive that they have been served and if health care is to be a right then they have to participate in the planning and delivery of that health care, that right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:22:30.332
That's certainly true and I think you had an opportunity to deal with some of this in the recent closings that you had to announce. I believe you announced that closing Delafield hospital and I believe one other

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:22:42.751
More Senior was the other hospital which had been closed or will be closed because a new one hundred million dollar replacement has been built in the North Central Bronx area.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:22:53.041
That really is more of a replacement.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:22:54.540
This is a replacement. This...

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:22:55.731
What about the Delafield situation because again this particular community board I happen to have heard one of their statements on the air saying that this particular community was going to be left without adequate health care et cetera. And I also read your statement where you indicate that health care would be provided appropriately. Yet I do know that as an administrator you probably are loath to close any health facility in the city because they just so badly need it. How did you arrive at that decision and what effect is it going to have on the health care.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:23:24.881
You've closed every hospital in the city in New York. You would not begin to significantly address the fiscal problems of the city in New York. Its false economy to close hospitals which are generating revenue on the inpatient side. How losses occur in the emergency services that we render to all of New York and the institutional amateur areas. It's this area that we were discriminated against by the legislature on a couple of occasions. And it's this area of rank discrimination that we are trying to reverse and we are asking help from the councilman and from the legislators in Albany to make sure that we are not treated as stepchildren. That we get a fair shake so that we can do what we are supposed to do. It's important to remember that we are not guilty of all of the things that people say we are. There are many many misconceptions that we need to disabuse people of and it's difficult to do so.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:24:24.021
Because that's one of the reasons why it's important for public officials and leaders like yourself to appear on programs such as Soul of Reason to try to communicate your particular point of view because certainly the public is distrustful of large bureaucracies, particularly billion dollar bureaucracies. And the suggestion is certainly you could cut back and cut back and cut back. On the other hand, the city does face a serious fiscal crisis some of which is probably due some way along the way to the fact that some of our agencies do not produce as much as they should. On the other hand we have a significant shortfall in revenue. Now you had mentioned that your cooperation helped to meet some of the shortfall by generating additional inbound

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:25:09.063
Additional unbudgeted income

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:25:10.170
Now how did you do this.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:25:11.701
We did it by several ways. First we improved our collection techniques and then we went to Albany and we've been to Washington from Albany we've got our Medicaid rate reimbursement increased. We've been in negotiation with Blue Cross and other third party payers trying to make sure that we as a corporation are more nearly adequately compensated for the services that we are rendered. It has not been easy. And one of the reluctance is that I found in Albany, Albany was reluctant to give me the money because they told me that if they gave me the money that the city of New York would take it away from me.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:25:47.660
And that's exactly what happened.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:25:48.770
And it was actually what happened now.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:25:50.242
Now what can be done to stop that. I think that's probably the most serious thing that you've said today that his revenue has been generated for health care and now has been siphoned off into other sources.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:26:00.921
It's been siphoned off

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:26:01.451
By the city government because it does feel that it needs it. And you of course are a member remember the mayor's cabinet and I'm sure as we all know from reading the press it made your views heard very very loudly. But what can the public do about this.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:26:14.690
Well the public has to recognize that health is very important and rather than looking to cut health as most people do because no one ever plans to get sick but you're an awful shape if the provision for health care is not there when you need it. And as I indicated before 90 percent of all New Yorkers depend on us for emergency care. I think that they should lobby for health that they should take the time to find the facts. They should react unemotionally. They should make sure that the legislators know that they are concerned about their health and hospitals corporation, about its efficiency and about its ability to operate in a prospective manner so that we can have this broad base of support that's necessary.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:26:59.270
But again after the lobbying is just as you did so ably in Washington and Albany then you find that this money that is given to the city for health care is siphoned off. Is there some way of really stopping that.

Dr. John L.S. Holloman, Jr. 00:27:12.650
It's extremely difficult but it certainly can be done. We are accountable we have statements that are 99 percent certified and I don't think any other agency can say this. So I think if we can get our story told, if we can get rid of some of the lies that New Yorkers are fair and that we'll get a fair shake for the Health and Hospitals Corporation.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr. 00:27:35.060
I think it's about as clear a statement as can be made. I'd like to thank our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason, Dr. John Holliman who's president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation who has told us about some of the accomplishments and some of the problems that the corporation faces and how important it is for the public at large to support this Corporation which provides health care to literally millions of people and emergency care to practically every New Yorker. Thanks again Mike for being our guest on tonight television. Dr. Brown It's a privilege to be here.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:04.940
You've been listening to Soul of Reason with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro American affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

