Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.550
Thousands of acres of beach and marsh land now make up the Gateway National Park in New York. How will this new park relate to the Black and Hispanic community of New York City? Here William Kornblum, Herb Cables and Francis Gibson of the National Park Service, discuss the role of this park for minority group people in New York City, on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper 00:00:44.151
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:11.060
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason", are three representatives of the National Park Service.These folk are involved in planning the new Gateway National Park. Bill Kornblum, Herb Cables and Francis Gibson are with us tonight. Welcome to "Sole of Reason" fellas.

Cross Talk 00:01:28.551
Thank you. Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:30.471
All right, could we begin possibly by asking Bill the question what really is the Gateway National Park and why is it necessary to have a planning committee that involves people of the type of backgrounds that are with us tonight?

William Kornblum 00:01:47.260
Well Gateway National Recreation Area is really the first major urban national park in the United States. And it's designed to bring parks to the people--from the federal level at least--the idea is that the National Park Service has run major parks like Yosemite and Yellowstone the Cascades, Olympic mainly out west and in the south, and there really has been a need for the federal government to become more involved in a big way in recreation and leisure for the people of the major cities so that Gateway in New York is really the first major attempt to do this.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:26.722
Now for New Yorkers, possibly we can describe the fact that the Gateway National Park, as we said in the intro and encompasses thousands of acres of beach and marsh land which goes all the way from Jamaica Bay to Riis Park all the way out to--what is that Seagate, I believe they call it--out on the end of Breezy Point out on the end of the island. And these were areas that were owned by the city that were bought up by the federal government to be translated into a national park. And as you mentioned Bill so much of national parks in the past have been out in the wilderness, and the folks in the big cities don't get much of a shot at it, and yet New York City has literally hundreds of thousands of acres of good park land, and now we have a national park. Now possibly Herb you can tell us what the role that you as a Recreation Specialist will be playing in helping to conceptualize the park. See, this is something new. We've had the marsh land, we have reached Riis Beach and many folks from the Black and Hispanic community know Riis Beach very well. And yet this past summer we went out there we saw federal policemen and we had a few little interesting things happen out there. And we found out that it is really a national park. So tell us what you about in terms of this planning.

Herb Cables 00:03:48.080
Well what I think Roscoe as far as Francis and myself's involvement is concerned, we're new to the National Park Service and probably we're hired simply because of our urban experience in parks and recreation. I view our particular role as being a very responsive to the minority community. I think the sensitivity that we bring to the National Park Service--the National Park Service traditionally being Western oriented-- means that we're concerned with activities within the park within gateway that are reflective of what it is that the inner city people need, desire and deserve. And in that light we're presently in the planning process of entertaining ideas, soliciting the input of the inner city community to help us form formulate the kinds of things that will be most responsive to the needs of the inner city people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:59.840
Now when you talk about that, Francis what are you conceptualizing as some of the needs of inner city people. When I frequently hear people talk about needs of inner city people ranging all the way from education to health to recreation, I tend to say well darn their needs are the same as anybody else, they want to live a healthy, fruitful, entertaining, interesting, sometimes exciting life. Now we have this large mass of acres--Jamaica Bay, Riss Beach, Breezy Point and so on--that is now called the Gateway National Park. It's got to be the gateway to some things I guess it means a gateway to the shores of New York or what have you. Now what are some of these needs that you deputizing as you going through this planning process?

Francis Gibson 00:05:45.960
Well Roscoe, first of all I like to go back from beginning and clear up a couple of things. The Gateway National Recreation Area of course is one of two. There's a Golden Gate National Recreation Area in San Francisco. And this this concept was to bring, the National Parks to the masses on both coasts. Okay. We want to clear that up.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:09.512
Beautiful. Beautiful.

Francis Gibson 00:06:10.201
The other thing is that the lands that we are developing here are former military lands declared surplus. Okay. So there I include the surplus lands from the military, other than just city and state parks.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:25.380
This will include the area we know as Floyd Bennett Field.

Francis Gibson 00:06:28.350
Right. That's where headquarters is Floyd Bennett Field. Then I'd like to point out also that not only do we have units at Jamaica Bay and Breezy Point, but we have units at Staten Island and Sandy Hook New Jersey. And the reason why I had to point to that cause that's primarily my responsibility. My partner here Herb Cables is responsible for the Jamaica Bay, Breezy Point areas and I'm responsible for Sandy Hook and Staten Island although we have overlapping responsibility and we we'll be involved in each area. Getting back to your question regarding to what the needs are for inner cities what we can probably bring here to the park is, I think what we're really talking about is an exposure type of thing for various and all types of programs in which we will be developing at this national park. And I'd say many pilot programs also. At this point we're not sure what result we will achieve. We're not sure how much of the various programs developed and presented at the national parks will be interesting to inner city.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:41.550
Well let's talk about that because much of the Park Service as you say has been Western outdoor oriented involving boating and canoeing and riding and hiking and so on. Well Jamaica Bay as you know is a marsh land is good area for watching birds and maybe doing some type of biological work. I think they have a high school now that relates very closely to the Bay Area in terms of marine biology. Riis Beach is a beach that as I said many Blacks and Hispanics have used for years for swimming, heavy into basketball and various games of that type. And more recently they've started discoing on the evenings and the like. How is that being regarded? Is that really what you want to try to do? Sometimes folks say what you want to do in recreation is to expand the horizons of people, yet on the other hand we have a park with all this marsh land et cetera and beach land and possibly the highlight activities might be basketball and discoing, things which can be done right on the block. So maybe Herb can relate to that question.

Herb Cables 00:08:54.030
Yes I didn't want to imply that the needs of the inner city were any different than any other community. What I intended to, what I'm trying to get across is that we're presently in the planning process which is of necessity required in the development of the national facility. However, what I think we would like to do and what we're hoping to do is to update the present equipment and facilities that the people in the area have come to know and use to great extent that's the basketball, handball and so forth. I think however what the national park also will do for the inner city people is bring more cultural activities into the park in a in a in an area of closer proximity than they perhaps could avail themselves heretofore. I'm talking about drama situations, puppet shows and things of that sort. Probably also a lot of instructional kinds of activities, in addition to that because of its proximity to the bay and so forth, we'll be into a lot of environmental programs and historic interpretive kinds of things by virtue of the fact that there is a great deal of history and interpretive information available at Fort Hancock and other military installations that we've gotten. So this is the kind of thing that we hope to be able to do immediately and as we go along in the planning process we hope also to be innovative, come up with some new ideas.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:42.450
That's interesting that you bring in a historical because I know Francis with your beat being Staten Island, this sandy ground community in Staten Island which was one of the first and probably the largest Black oyster development community which goes all the way back into the 19th century so that there is something else that we've been working on through our work at the university with the New York City Bicentennial Corporation that we find that there are a lot of these shore communities which had a lot of black input going back into the 19th century which probably fringe right close to some of your park lands. And if you get into that ethnic heritage approach that certainly is a way of making the shore and the park more relevant because too frequently in the inner cities it's felt that you know water and us don't mix.

Francis Gibson 00:11:38.052
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:39.111
And biology and us don't mix and yet some of the premium fishermen and oyster and sea seafood industries came out of the Black and Hispanic communities right on the shores all the way up and down from South Carolina right all the way up through Rhode Island. So what are some of the things that you're going to try to deal with in Staten Island and then the Sandy Hook area because that's a little bit farther away from the very very concentrated mass. It's easy to hop out to Riis Beach and Jamaica Bay take subway and take a bus and you're there but it's a little harder to get to Staten Island even harder to get Sandy Hook. So what are the kind of things you have in mind there Francis?

Francis Gibson 00:12:24.201
Well Roscoe of course we are involved in some transportation studies and we expect to develop some programs whereby we can bring these inner city youth, minorities into the Staten Island and Sandy Hook New Jersey area as a result of this. But one other thing I like to point out here is that we want to expose the inner city youth and the minorities to the inside of the National Park System. By that I mean that we want to try to develop some interest in careers with a national park. We want to provide some seasonal and part-time job opportunities and some exposure along those lines and this is nearing which is sort of untapped so far as the national parks are concerned. Myself, I live at Miller Field. My family is there but my family is the only Black family associated with the national park at Miller Field or Sandy Hook New Jersey for that matter. So during the peak of the summer activities when I'm making my rounds and checking out these activities and programs then I want to see a certain number of minorities being involved both working for the National Park System and then involved in the activities. And one of the other hats that Herb and I wear is that we are EEO Counselors for the Gateway National Park, National Recreation Area. So we're involved in personnel and counseling and working with these young people and the employees here as well as to develop the programs and activities.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:59.081
I see and of course that gets into the whole question when I asked Bill Kornblum --Bill is a Research Sociologist with the National Park Service--and that has to do with this whole idea of the planning process as I hear Herb and Francis talk, I hear tremendous amount of professional knowledge and wisdom et cetera, and it says we want to do this and we want to do that. On the other hand the planning process is one that grows out of the people in the community. And it's sort of a two way street that people have to know what's available to be able to know what they want. On the other hand dealing with professionals particularly dealing with professionals from the federal government--in this instance the National Park Service--it's sometimes overwhelming for the average resident of an inner city community or suburban community for that matter to deal with this. Now, Bill how have you and how has the Park Service conceptualize the involvement of inner city residents in the development of the park? On one hand as I said we've heard a lot about what the professionals see and I think what they have suggested represents some very positive things. On the other hand if it's going to reach the community the community has to understand and want these things and respond to them. And you being a sociologist must have some ideas about this.

William Kornblum 00:15:21.850
I have some ideas, yeah. First of all all of us Herb and Francis and myself and the other people involved in the planning are totally committed to the idea that the people of the city are really the major resource of the park that unless the people get involved in the planning and the decision making that goes into creating this park of the future, it's not going to ever really be successful. So, in accordance with that idea we have a number of strategies and ways that we're attempting to elicit the response of people in the community first of all of course we were obliged to contact the Community Planning Boards. There are 50 or more Community Planning Boards in the city of New York and then there are equivalent ones in New Jersey. And we we have a program of going out and meeting with the people who are involved in recreation in those planning boards. As a matter of fact, the New York City Planning Commission has a group which is aiding us in that in that effort. And then then we attempt to deal with the people who are using the park areas now to elicit their opinion and to try to get their advice about how things can work. For example you you mentioned the discos at Jacob Riis which were pretty successful up to a point well people were having a good time at the discos and yet the facilities really weren't adequate to handle the number of people who want that kind of activity. And we realized it really was an experimental program. Mr. Shields who was the Unit Manager at Jacob Riis Park and the National Park Police Officials realized that if you're going to do this you really have to invest the money and the effort in making the facilities better than just a makeshift kind of operation. So this is the kind of interaction that you get by talking to the people who are using the facilities and engaged in the programs and that feeds and into the planning process. Then the third thing and this relates to the other point you made I found very interesting about the oystering community on Staten Island. We're involved with the universities and with many of the voluntary groups around the city to try to find people who will be interested in what the park has to offer and may have to offer in the future so that in involving creating a program of events and historical interpretation in the park we have approached the people at Weeksville and the preservation group there and we approached the people on Staten Island and and as a matter of fact, a man I work with Terry Williams wrote a wrote one of the basic papers about the oystering community the Black oyster community on on Staten Island, and one of the things we realized there is that the degradation of the environment of New York by the New York Harbor was one of the things that resulted in the decline of that community and really helped prevent the opportunity for black people to continue this kind of traditional occupation on the sea, on the water.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:19.601
That's one of the things that I am particularly interested in as you talk about this park you know a lot of beach area a lot of marsh area a lot of area where there are birds and fish and so on and because of the concentration of Blacks and Hispanics in the crowded sections of the city and because of the limited number of educational opportunities they've had to get into this, there isn't that much interest or activity in the Black and Hispanic community and such things as birdwatching and exploration of shells and fish and various developments of nature. And when you talk to some folks about this you know this talk to you look at you like you out of your head because this isn't something Black people or Hispanic people are supposed to be into unless they live right on the water and you know it takes a long time to get there, something I haven't been relating to. As a sociologist, do you see any particular things that might be done to bring--if we want to use these words--the Black and Hispanic community closer to the nature that surrounds them.

William Kornblum 00:19:31.870
I think that the first thing that needs to be done and this will be new for the National Park Service is to relate this whole ecology environment movement to the actual situation of people who live in a city like New York. We have to say and demonstrate that the human ecology is just as important as the natural ecology and that they're all tied up together and related. It's, for a person living in upper Manhattan, it's the ecology of a block or the ecology of how the city is operating where the jobs are coming from, survival of the family, is much more important than the birds or the wildlife out in Jamaica Bay. It has to be that way and we have to we have to in creating our programs in the park, we have to make a combination that really relates to the actual needs that the people have in their own ecology, and then we can then we can begin to show what the larger natural ecology and how it is related to the more local human ecology that may be abstract.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:35.710
But what do you say makes sense. I think it makes very good sense. The problem is that as the Black community, Hispanic community has dealt with big government--big city government, big state government, big federal government--this usually doesn't happen. I get some very positive vibrations of what you say in terms of building on what the folks are interested in and relating it to their own community. But one of the things that I know a number of people concerned about when all of this land was put into the hands of the federal government is whether just ripping off New York and taking things off the tax rolls and so on. And it wasn't going to come back to help the people. Now, I would imagine that Herb and Francis have been out--and you too Bill--and talk with various community groups other than just talking with people who use it because if you talk with people who use the facilities quite possibly you're getting a view that is somewhat narrow because they using it and this is what they want. Have you had much discussion--let's say Herb--have you had much discussion with the various community groups in the New York City area about this part? First of all it's an educational task just to let them know that it exists.

Herb Cables 00:21:48.231
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:48.621
Which is one of the things that we are doing here tonight. But beyond that to look at their aspirations, to look at their understandings of what might be done. What are some of the things you've done on that, Herb?

Herb Cables 00:21:59.990
Very little. And it's unfortunate. In the short period of time that I've been associated with Gateway, i've probably made five to ten visitations to community groups and one of the things that concerns me with Gateway and with Gateway West is the lack of involvement of the Black and Hispanic community. Yesterday we had occasion to attend a advisory meeting and it's discouraging when the effort is being put forth by the National Park Service to be involved in those kinds of meetings and find very few Blacks and Hispanics represented. It's also discouraging when the opportunity is presented to the minority community that they don't avail themselves of the opportunity to become involved in the planning process which ultimately leads to employment and other considerations. And while I might not specifically have answered your question in terms of who we spoke to I would like to continue to address myself to the fact, that there are a number of seasonal positions available within the National Park Service. There is a consideration and a commitment by the National Park Service to hire minorities within the Gateway Project. Historically what happens is that when you go to fill these positions Unit Managers and people of other disciplines are quick to tell you that the individuals who have applied are not qualified and so forth. I would hope that our appearance on this program and the call to the minority community to get their applications in for seasonal employment at Floyd Bennett would be heeded.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:05.913
Alright now, what are some of the kinds of jobs and how does one get their application in? Whom do they call? Where do they write?

Herb Cables 00:24:13.310
Okay, they should address their inquiries to the Personnel Officer Gateway National Recreation Area. Floyd Bennett Field, Brooklyn New York. Zip code is 1 1 2 3 4.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:29.340
Okay could you repeat that? I think it's very important I know a number of people in the audience probably have young people who will be seeking summer employment or might even want to try themselves for this.

Speaker 13 00:24:39.830
That's the Gateway National Recreation Area and that's at Floyd Bennett Field, Brooklyn New York, zip is 1 1 2 3 4. The types of positions are Park Technicians which is a catch all title that talks to Recreation Personnel, Laborers and the like, First Aid.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:04.792
People who help clean up the park, watch kids.

Herb Cables 00:25:06.322
Right. Whatever.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:06.951
The typical type of jobs you have at beaches and parks.

Herb Cables 00:25:09.142
Lifeguard.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:09.860
Lifeguards, very good.

Herb Cables 00:25:12.110
Also there are some technical skills that are of necessity important during the summer. That's skills and crafts and other environmental studies and so forth. So that there are a number of good jobs available within the Gateway Project this summer.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:33.840
All right now Francis, what about community groups that want to have you or Herb or Bill come and talk with them about the park? How would they get in touch with you? How do they develop a communication there. Because I think that's one of the key things that needs to be done to make this park a viable part of New York City.

Francis Gibson 00:25:50.830
Yes Roscoe, I agree with you and the same number at Floyd Bennett Field is headquarters. Should they contact us there, then we would make arrangements to schedule an appearance.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:03.430
Is there a phone number where possibly they could reach out? Should it be done directly through mail? Because mail is certainly one way of doing it but if there's a phone number.

Francis Gibson 00:26:12.510
I'd like to see.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:13.013
A hotline.

Francis Gibson 00:26:13.661
I'd like to see us use a telephone number.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:15.340
Okay.

Francis Gibson 00:26:16.211
All right. And it's 2 5 2 9 2 0 8. Also Roscoe should it be somebody from Staten Island area and they wanted to contact me you knows I have a Staten Island number which is 3 5 1 8 7 0 0.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:35.732
Let's repeat those numbers. That's important. Community groups who would like to have someone discuss the Gateway National Park should call 2 5 2 9 2 0 8.

Francis Gibson 00:26:45.741
Yes that's that headquarters of Floyd Bennett Field.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:46.486
That's the headquarters of the Gateway Park at Floyd Bennett Field and those that would like to speak with Francis Gibson could call 3 5 1 8 700 on Staten Island.

Francis Gibson 00:26:56.411
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:56.772
And be able to get a relationship there. I think it's very, very important what you're doing because unless you develop the relationship with the community the park can't even come close to fulfilling its potential.

Francis Gibson 00:27:08.770
Well we have a selling job you see and and I get the opinion that they don't exactly have a real complete trust and in the national park system here as yet. So we have a selling job well it might take number of years and we may have to start with young people in the elementary schools and wet their appetite and build on it, you know in order to get the message across.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:31.301
I think this is a fantastic opportunity for the people of New York. It's a fantastic opportunity for the minority community and particularly it's a challenge to the federal government and it's a challenge to people like Bill and Francis and Herb to be able to develop this park so they will be a viable part of the National Park System, because it is our money. We do pay the taxes. We are citizens of this country. And just as you have Gateway National in the east and Gateway West out on the West Coast we've got to make this park a very important part of our society. I'd like to thank our guests on tonight "Soul of Reason", Bill Kornblum, Francis Gibson and Herb Cable of the National Park Service for discussing the Gateway National Park.

00:28:19.271
Thank you for having us. You.

Radio Bumper 00:28:21.610
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason", with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

