Speaker 1 00:00:01.210
Is welfare a fraud. Are the new changes in the social services law a danger to black people. What can be done to humanize social services for all people here. S.E. green Social Services Research Specialists discuss these questions on tonight's soul of reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:37.530
This is Soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 3 00:01:03.990
With us tonight on soul of reason is Ashley Green who is a social services research specialist.

Speaker 4 00:01:09.720
And tonight we'll be talking about social services the changes in social welfare law and what welfare means to black people. Glad to have you with us tonight S.E. on our program. Good evening Roscoe. Well now the present situation in terms of Social Services is in flux going all the way back to the days of Moynihan who says that we ought to change things and sort of ignore black people.

Speaker 3 00:01:31.470
But at the same time try to restructure the black family by providing more social service support the new family assistance programs which supposedly are to guarantee an annual income to every family et cetera are deadlocked in Congress.

Speaker 4 00:01:46.710
Many black organizations are saying that these changes are good some others are saying that these changes are not so good. What is the present state of the art. The present state of political maneuverings around welfare in the Congress in particular.

Speaker 5 00:02:03.000
I think is still very unclear especially in view of the fact of the tenor and the tone of the country yet at this time we are now faced with different crisis is about the economic situation of the country nationally and internationally. You also are dealing with the political scene in the country and these all affect the social policies of the country and the direction we are going in. I think right now one of the things that black people have to address themselves is to the kinds of services and institutions they want to see develop out here for their benefit in conjunction with a national kind of policy for the whole country.

Speaker 4 00:02:44.550
Now as we look at that you raise some interesting points. One you pointed out that the social climate the political climate has a lot to do with what society wants to do about welfare. On the other hand we have a economy which basically hovers around a 4 percent unemployment rate which means that the society just can't ignore people who don't work.

Speaker 6 00:03:03.630
And in addition we have a number of people who have children and do not have fathers. We have a number of people who are older all people who require social services.

Speaker 3 00:03:15.120
So the changes in social welfare law that are being proposed suggests well we ought to guarantee everybody a certain amount of money but same time we got to put some restrictions on them in terms of what they can do and the way they can receive these services.

Speaker 4 00:03:29.700
The question comes up is whether welfare people should get the money themselves or whether in fact they should be voucher. They should have a piece of paper which says if you go here you can get that. How does this really fit in to a comprehensive philosophy of social welfare.

Speaker 5 00:03:46.440
Well I think first we have to set the definition of what we mean when we call him as social welfare. Social welfare encompasses a lot of things. It's about 25 percent of the national budget you know which I don't think most people deal with and it included in that is every phase of human living that affects the lifestyle of people education medical housing any almost anything you can think of that involves services of some kind. So when we're talking about social welfare we're not talking about just money in kind to help the poor. We're talking about services that. In some way or another can be utilized by the majority of all of the American citizens. And then when you look at it in that way moneys to provide just basic living standard is a form comes under the Labor kind of labor part of the economy and you have to examine each component of the whole social world policy in that way and that's separated out. When we talk about a guaranteed income we really not sure what we're talking about. We're not sure whether we're talking about a basic minimum standard of living for all families and then you have to deal with economics then what is necessary to considered to be basic in an urban situation may not be the same in a real situation. And I think that's when you bring in all components here. Yes I could talk about economists your politicians your health people your educational. And I think that's where we have to sit down and start dealing with a comprehensive approach not just this is funds for those people who find themselves having to utilize the services of the quotes Department of Welfare Human Services situations. Now when you say a comprehensive approach obviously you're talking the labor market and you talk about health and you're talking about education etc. But one of the things that's catalyzed these so-called social welfare reform is the allegation that on one hand in some of the Southern States in particular.

Speaker 4 00:05:49.880
People who really need help they're sick they're older that they have children etc.. I don't get very much because of the fact that the states don't put up very much money for federal government put it up at one end of the continuum the other end of the continuum suggests that in the urban communities there are a lot of people who just cheat very people who move to the urban communities in order to get welfare.

Speaker 7 00:06:11.120
Now the data indicate that's just not so. But nonetheless those are the ends of the continuum both ends of the political continuum that presses for social welfare reform and the middle ground seems to be where we'll guarantee every family.

Speaker 1 00:06:27.460
A certain basic standard of living possibly adjusted by region according to the reasonable standard of living etc.. But this really doesn't deal with the basic issue that you pose namely how does a society organize itself to meet the basic human needs of housing of jobs of food and medical care for people. Now what are some of the things that the theorist in social work and in social service are conceptualizing to help. Society be more effective going beyond the question of the guaranteed annual wage.

Speaker 8 00:07:01.940
I think right now we're kind of in the process of dealing with more long range plan to exist for exists as it existed. The health plan that has been rejected by Kennedy and I can't think of the other person's name right now is one in which seems all encompassing. But when you examine the entire plan it is still going to benefit those people who are able to you understand it. And that's what happened when you have social services on a broader scale that are not. Where poor people do not have the expertise to interpret it for them.

Speaker 4 00:07:41.450
The law is very complicated and what you can get what you can get is very complicated for a pretty obvious fiscal reasons.

Speaker 1 00:07:49.400
But when the consumer gets to use it he does know what he's entitled to and if he runs into a bureaucrat administering it who isn't willing to interpret it his way or even who isn't willing to interpret it all he or she is frustrated. What all options do you have. How do you deal with this. Because on one hand you have this idea of the society providing a service for the individual the other and you have the theory or give the people the money and let them get the services whichever way they might feel they want to get them.

Speaker 8 00:08:20.690
But I think you're running into a con trick bag when you say give the people the money and let them get the services because then you're talking about purchasing services again and you have to understand when you're purchasing services at cause and if you if you're dealing with a limited amount of funds and it's all still dealing with scarcity of resources no matter how we look at it you have to be able to know what is going to be the best buy for you and poor people just don't have that at their fingertips the way a middle class person upper middle class person might be able to seek out that kind of information. So then you're talking about having experts at the hand available technical experts available for poor people. And that means some kind of coalition of poor people to purchase the services of an expert to interpret what is legally their right. So you then you're talking about then purchasing services and this gets into educating folks and informing folks of whether they're right and how you do this. It's also a problem that we're still dealing with now when you say educating people about their rights it brings to mind the National Welfare Rights group that was organized and led by the late George Wiley.

Speaker 7 00:09:39.570
And this of course created a lot of consternation because a lot of people said what rights do people have on welfare. And of course that raises the question as to the attitude of society to people who for a variety of reasons do fall into either poverty or into illness or what have you. The idea is that anybody who really is strong enough can make it. If we have a society you've made a strong people and people who don't do that are weak. And so George while in people like yourself and others in the Welfare Rights Movement say look the people on welfare have the same rights as anyone else and because they haven't been able to articulate them they need spokesmen like us to work with them and helping to articulate this. Now what do we do when we come to that intersection of the interests of a society who feels that people who really are hard workers can make it and people who have fallen into poverty and other types of problems who say look we've tried to make it but there's racism as poor housing and a lot of other things that are keeping us from making it. How does the social services specialist deal with this. I know some have gotten into advocacy and some have gotten into improving administration. What do you think the thrust is in the field on this particular area. Well I think you need all you know you can get when you especially when you're dealing with a work ethic which is predominates in this country and in many ways it's supported. By.

Speaker 9 00:11:16.990
Policy and just our basic way of living in this country. So you're going to have to when you're dealing with poor people deal with advocacy and buying of technical and expert skills utilizing of all forms of making known the needs and the rights of poor people. And this is going to take as I said before some kind of coalition the purchasing of technical skills the utilizing those forces that are going to be necessary to make known to whatever system is is involved what the what poor people need which I think basically is. No but I think when you start dealing with money you're also dealing with what are the priorities.

Speaker 10 00:12:05.200
You say it's basically known as what poor people need and some be less charitable so they need to go out and go to work. Now what about that age old argument that people who are receiving social services really are able to go out to work and the reason why they don't work is because they are lazy how to work. What does the data say about that.

Speaker 9 00:12:24.790
How do you data has proven that to be false. And I think to get hung up in an argument or a discussion with that is taking away from the energies needed to begin to develop some kind of comprehensive plan.

Speaker 7 00:12:38.320
Well on one hand it might be so but if you need the votes of citizens to elect people who are going to be positively disposed I do think that people do need to understand the difference between people who require social services because they are poor because they don't have skills because they're ill and the fact that people aren't these people aren't working because they're lazy because there are so many people including many black people who believe that anybody who is on welfare really is on there because they are just lazy and they don't want to deal with that bad situation. And of course that isn't true and that gets into the whole question of skills and the labor market and what kind of jobs are available.

Speaker 10 00:13:27.400
For example if you pay someone a minimum wage and they have children by the time they arrange for childcare and transportation and lunch they are actually in a negative situation if they make eighty dollars a week and they have four kids to deal with.

Speaker 11 00:13:40.000
But I think we are also missing a component here Richard to that point you just made quite often what you find is that those people who are really eligible also welfare is not putting. We are not really subsidizing the majority of families in the situation you just discussed yet one not knowing the rise the whole harassment of going and seeking out those services that are available to them. It's a very difficult difficult process and I use harassment to people who seek out services.

Speaker 10 00:14:14.800
Could you give an example of that. I think it's the whole bureaucratic structure of applying for assistance.

Speaker 11 00:14:21.910
Has been discussed and written about on many many occasions as we call a lot of the programs that came out of the mobilization youth projects and all these kind of packages demonstrated very clearly the inhumane treatment of persons applying for work what was legally their right and that's where we came in to realizing that social workers in the helping professions had to begin to consider another role and that was that the role of being an advocate for for those people seeking services that were legally theirs. But I think for most people just the whole process of entering such a bureaucratic structure that has certain guidelines certain legal components to it is one that becomes very confusing if you have no kind of expertise in dealing with such a structure.

Speaker 10 00:15:14.950
And of course the other thing I think you're alluding to is the general social atmosphere that pervades in many bureaucracies and it's not fair to accuse all be wrong. But in many bureaucracies in terms of dealing with the poor and the powerless anyone who has had occasion to why for any particular service who is middle class but happens not to have been well-dressed on that day can determine the difference in the way he's treated or she is treated when he's not or they're not well dressed and when they are and I think that's a subtle kind of thing. Tonight on sole reason we are discussing social welfare reform and some of the new developments in social services with S.E. Green who is a social services research specialist.

Speaker 12 00:15:59.820
Now speaking of these changes do black social services workers have special responsibilities. And if they do what are some of the things that various groups of Black Social Workers are trying to do to alleviate or modify some of the situations. I happen to feel we have a special responsibility.

Speaker 9 00:16:22.510
And I think we have to begin to deal with longer range planning policy and become involved in this field. Heretofore we've been the workers in programs and we've been accepting of much of the policy that goes down the planning that goes down in terms of translating it to the people that we work with in service. And I think at this point I think black people particularly black social workers and those in a helping profession are becoming more aware that if we are to be able to make any real impact in the direction of changing things and here we're going to have to deal with the policy and planning aspect of it the organizational aspect of it those things that set an implant. Permanent kinds of directions for the future until we move into that area. We're going to constantly be in the trauma we're in just being in the middle of translating a policy plan that we feel is inadequate or in some cases detrimental to the people we serve as an example of a policy question might be.

Speaker 12 00:17:35.050
The question as to whether welfare families should be integrated into middle income or middle class neighborhoods for example where you have a neighborhood of all privately owned homes on a tree lined street. To what extent should welfare a place welfare families in those homes. Because one of the things and I've heard this and several black neighborhoods is that some black middle class people allege that the deterioration of their neighborhoods is a function of significant numbers of welfare families being placed in homes which are vacant and the owners want to make a quick buck and therefore go to the city. That's a policy question. What is the special responsibility of black social welfare workers in dealing with a question like that.

Speaker 13 00:18:28.960
But I think if we deal with if everybody has the right to live decently I think then we can address it in a different kind of way. I think as long as we can see we begin to get become intimidated by what is happening to the neighborhood what does it mean to move in close to welfare family. This is becomes an issue that you really can't move beyond because what you're dealing with is an emotional kind of fear instead of the reality. What does it take to keep your neighborhood the way you want it.

Speaker 12 00:19:01.420
Well let's talk about that reality. I think it's unfortunate we use you for euphemisms like my family. But let's say we have a family who is on. We received public assistance in many instances as you well know you can not determine the way in which people live or take care of their home whether on public assistance or not because they take care of their home just like everyone else. On the other hand there is substantial research indicates that people in general who are not owners of private homes eat both don't have the resources and sometimes don't have the interest keep them up. Now what in fact is a neighborhood going to do. And what in fact in the social work profession do to bridge this gap when in fact this begins to happen in the neighborhood when a house begins to run down and the landlord doesn't do anything the children begin to do other kinds of things which cannot be controlled because of the lack of parental influence. And they call the welfare office. What are you gonna do about this and welfare that the people have as much right to live here as you do now. It's true a property on his home could go down in the same way and the neighbors might raise the same questions. Apparently there's greater peer pressure among property owners as against people who are not proper noun. So how does. Again I'm not asking for a specific answer the question was a difficult question to answer but what is the role of the social work profession that really is a question we're trying to get in. In particular the role of the black social worker like social policy maker I think you're addressing indicators.

Speaker 13 00:20:36.550
Certain indicators because when you say this is happening because of lack of parental control or this is happening because of this I think you have to deal with what is what makes the family or a community or primary good begins to deteriorate in the running down of property is just an indicator of what other kind of problems are in existence. And I think when we begin to examine the total cost could be the school something going on in the school. It could be a crisis with the family where if we had proper kind of services that could address these these problems that you might not see certain kind of behavior the behavior would demonstrate some basic kind of problem. And we usually we end up dealing with the symptoms instead of looking for the core of the problem.

Speaker 10 00:21:23.420
Of course you hit the nail on the head. Part of the social work profession origin of it was to deal with the symptom the poverty in a society basically is a symptom of some economic malfunctions and social malfunctions. And we have a profession which was really created to deal with the symptoms and now because of their insight and experience is aware of the fact that what you call symptoms other people call trouble is really a part of a larger picture.

Speaker 14 00:21:51.860
But then the society comes back to these specialists who are supposed to be dealing with the symptoms and what are you going to do about it. And then the specialist answers a really can't do anything specifically about those symptoms. We have to address the largest scene. So how do you deal with that type of values the term cognitive dissonance that type of inconsistency.

Speaker 13 00:22:11.460
It's it's very confusing and I think why addressing the crisis situation you also have to have a comprehensive long range planning going on. And you have to begin to build in your society and in those agency doing it within the primary group itself an ID that why you're working and reacting to crisis situations. You also have to begin to plan long range planning which is basically done in certain levels except for poor people. And I think that is one of the issues that black social workers and you know the helping profession must begin to address itself too. How do you begin to do long range planning while also dealing with the crisis of everyday living.

Speaker 7 00:22:54.500
Speaking of long range planning. How then does the drive for better social services relate to changes in the black political scene. Apparently there is a heavy in a relationship between the provision of social services and the political scene etc.. So what's happening in that regard as social service people becoming involved in that. How do the changes in the black political scene affect the social services network. Well I think what has happened over the years in terms of more black people becoming involved in being elected to office.

Speaker 13 00:23:31.430
Has brought about an awareness not only for those the social service worker but also poor people themselves. It's slow and it's very gradual and people are still waiting distrustful of the whole process. But I think for black the black social worker at least for myself I began to and beginning to see the need to combine it all and pull it together. I myself have been involved in a lot of political things especially in the last few years since the CUNY struggle at City College and understood the political implications there. With the seat program the legislation and what that meant and begin to analyze this thing right now I'm working on the Carmichael campaign and in view of a combination of factors that we cannot live in a society where we don't have any kind of political input and we have to begin at some level and I think the local level where people can identify more readily and kind of touch base it's what you know the direction I think we should be moving in.

Speaker 14 00:24:36.950
Carl McCall campaign is the New York state senatorial and in the Upper Manhattan Supply Side district and your role in this is as a private citizen but obviously you bring to bear your expertise as a social services specialist but this is needed.

Speaker 15 00:24:55.160
This is the kind of thing this is the new kind of political direction we need where we combine and pull together a comprehensive approach to improving living conditions for all people. As you know the Upper West Side. This district is a very mixed district and it's a very unusual district and whereby you have a large percentage of white black and Third World people in this area middle class and poor people and even some fairly affluent. Yeah well yeah yeah. And then you have one of the major universities in Columbia is up there. So you've got quite a handful of resources to deal with and this should be an interesting kind of campaign because it begins to set a tone for new kinds of political move maneuvers and a accountability to all people which I think Carl McCall can bring to to the new political scene here.

Speaker 10 00:25:53.420
Now other people in the social work profession also involved in politics would say nationally I believe there is a national black social work organization and they have worked fairly extensively with the Black Congressional Black Caucus which unfortunately is too few in number only 15 16 of them. But there is some awareness in that particular area now as we come toward the close of the program. Would you briefly indicate to any black youth or third well you who are listening as to what kind of training should they seek if they really want to get into this field.

Speaker 15 00:26:26.810
I personally am moving much much more closer to blacks moving into this here need to begin to deal with the control management and running of institutions more so than just the training in terms of individual group and see all kinds of responsibilities. We have to begin to think about how to run and control those institutions that affect our lives. And that moves into understanding institutions knowing understanding what planning is about understanding how policy comes into being and we're going to have any kind of impact that way way would some where would you get this kind of training.

Speaker 12 00:27:06.980
What kind of major should they take. What kind of schools should they go to.

Speaker 13 00:27:10.840
They are going to have to deal with for your senior colleagues anyway. A senior college and eventually graduate school I think our heavy emphasis on economics political science history the sciences is it are those fields that we've lacked in the past locked into moving into and we're going to have to begin to pull that together as well as with the sociology field and the other components that most black people tend to move towards. We're going to have to start dealing with communications. We're going to have to start dealing with a whole host of areas that can show how things go.

Speaker 12 00:27:46.040
All right. I think that's a beautiful summary of our discussion tonight on changes in social services and what is needed to help make the social service profession and the social service endeavor more responsive to black and poor people. Thanks for being our guest on tonight sole reason as agreed. Thanks for asking.

Speaker 16 00:28:03.650
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host. The director of the Institute for one hour affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring distinguished guests voicing the black experience. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

