Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:00:04.220
This is the sound of a box of laundry starch. Tens of thousands of Black Americans eat laundry starch contributing to a higher proportion of iron deficiency anemia among Blacks. Here, Gerald Deas discuss what can be done about this unknown health problem. On tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:43.051
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:01:09.940
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is Dr. Gerald Deas who is a physician. He's in the Department of Internal Medicine at Jamaica Hospital. And we're going to be talking about a very serious yet not too well known health problem among Blacks. Glad to have you with us tonight Gerri.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:01:25.661
Thanks for being here Dr. Brown.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:01:27.040
Well could you begin by telling us about how laundry starch is eaten by significant segments of the poor Black population and what its effects are.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:01:38.291
Well Dr. Brown, eating laundry starch has been with us for over 50 years. In fact throughout the South, this practice has been a custom and has become a cultural custom for years and years now. In fact my mother, who is in her 70s right now, has also eaten has also eaten this starch, and a great deal of the people in her area did. Now we do not know the reason why this starch has been eaten in such a large amount. However we do know that there's a close relationship between eating this particular type of starch- laundry starch and eating clay- red clay out of the hills and certain kinds of other clays that are found in the southern part of our country.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:02:26.350
Now this is just so unusual when you say eating laundry starch, are you really saying that people will open a box of laundry starch and pick out the pieces of starch and chew them.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:02:36.401
Definitely.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:02:36.941
It's like chewing gum or is it something that they people do because it tastes good or it satisfies a particular need to have some feeling in the mouth?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:02:46.780
Well when I first came upon the custom when I was interning at Kings County Hospital I actually, well and even since that time, have taken the material and have placed it in my mouth and tried to find out what kind of satisfaction it was and the only thing that I got out of it was that it was a very dry brittle crunchy sort of material. In fact if you ask the person who eats this particular laundry starch which the most one, which the one they use the most is Argo starch, laundry starch. They will tell you it's the crunching, it's in fact, when they go into grocery stores to buy this material they have to shake the box oftentimes because if it's powdery or doesn't have a particular shake like a rattle they will not buy that particular box. They'll say that's a bad box or I have a good box here. And of course this material is produced in a very unsanitary fashion because it's produced from for an external use so bacterial cultures and things like that that have been done on it now have shown large amounts of bacteria in this material.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:03:47.890
I see now we had said at the beginning of the show, particularly based on some papers that you've given us that the large intake of laundry starch is related to a fairly significant amount of iron deficiency anemia among Blacks and also possibly due to the fact that many Black infants are born undernourished and undeveloped.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:04:09.611
Definitely. In fact there have been papers that have been produced right now that have actually quantitative the amount of starch a person eats in relationship to their hemoglobin. For example a average hemoglobin it should be 14 grams.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:04:23.281
Let's say for the audience hemoglobin is the iron carrying capacity of the blood.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:04:27.540
Right. This is the red material that makes up the blood. blood cells. Now it should be 14 grams. Now the average person who is eating this particular laundry starch if you give and quantitative if they eat one box a day their hemoglobin falls into eight point eight grams. Now this is definitely an anemia. Now these folks will go to a hospital and find out that they have an anemia. They will find out that they have an iron deficiency anemia. Now they they will be given iron and sent home and said well you'll say well you'll be all right and so forth. But as they continue to eat the laundry starch which the doctor has oftentimes not asked them whether they have eaten this material, they'll still have the anemia because the starch is binds the iron in the gastrointestinal tract or in the gut and prevents the iron from being absorbed and therefore causing the anemia.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:05:20.320
Now when you say binds the iron is this the physical process or-

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:05:23.201
This is a chemical process.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:05:24.491
In other words it makes it impossible chemically for the iron to be absorbed from the small intestine.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:05:30.250
That's right. Right. And consequently these people will go on and continue with their anemia. Now when this is why it's so important that not only has it been a revelation that the patient does not realize that the starch gives this iron deficiency anemia but there are many doctors who do not know this either. If for example white doctors who have been trained and see mostly white institutions or having mostly white patients they are not aware of these customs just like I'm not aware of the customs of a lot of of patients that might be in the Jewish or the Italian cultures.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:06:03.511
Cultures.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:06:04.002
Right. So therefore they do not ask this particular question do you eat laundry and believe me this is not information that's given by the patient a very readily. You have to say how much laundry starch do you eat. You don't even ask the question, do you eat laundry starch because it's kind of like a cultural thing which they even hide from our family members, even, because family members even know that it makes them feel bad at certain times and so forth.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:06:30.801
But this general characteristic of eating certain kinds of substances I believe is called Pica, P-I-C-A.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:06:36.951
Right, taken from the Latin meaning magpie, which is a bird that eats anything.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:06:42.380
I see. Now pica, the characteristic pica, I understand is indigenous to a considerable number of rural people and poor people and particularly Black people.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:06:52.551
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:06:53.101
And now that we have some significant migration from the south to the north. Are there large numbers of Blacks for example in New York who chew who eat laundry starch?

00:07:04.070
Roscoe, I would say even, I'll give you just a statistic from Chicago which is I would have to compare with New York because I- there're papers written from Chicago, in an obstetric population, that is a population of pregnant women Black women, there. They have found that 39 percent of these women eat laundry starch during their pregnancy. Now this is the most important time of any for the fetus or for the young baby that's growing in the mother to have the nutrition, to have the mother at its peak health and if she has anemia this baby is going to have premature birth, be lower weight and so forth. We don't even know what affect right at the present time it has upon the developing brain of that child or ultimately the learning capacity of that particular child that's born from a mother who eats such large amounts of this material during her pregnancy.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:07:57.501
All right. Now we've established the fact that it's a fairly indigenous characteristic to a significant number of poor Black people. By the way is this a characteristic that might affect some segments of the Spanish population as well?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:08:09.770
The Spanish population, so far I have not found a high percentage of Spanish people who eat this as a-

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:08:17.580
As a pica.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:08:18.141
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:08:18.651
But almost every culture has some kind of pica.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:08:21.501
Definitely. In fact the Iranian women have a high incidence of eating clay. Also in speaking to an Iranian doctor the other day after he saw the material that I produced on this particular laundry starch. He's told me that in his country the women eat the clay right off the walls of the houses that they live in and they get all kind of parasites in the intestinal tract. And they also develop an anemia also from the particular clay that they eat.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:08:46.590
Now this apparently isn't due to the fact that the people who eat it feel that it gives them nutrition.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:08:52.211
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:08:52.640
It's due to, what, a craving?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:08:54.751
An urgent, a severe craving and then which has since developed into a cultural trait in fact. In Alex Haley's a book of Roots, on page 27 he describes the African eating the red clay. In fact they call it Africana cachexia, because people who eat this dirt in Africa waste away. In fact this was a form of suicide at one particular time. And so plantation owners in the south when they found a clay eater they got rid of him out of that particular group of people because they found out that this person would just waste away. This is all he would desire.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:09:32.540
Well given the fact that we've established this is a serious health problem and you and some other physicians have begun to do research on it and are publicizing it, what can or what is being done to help bring this to the attention of the public? Obviously programs like appearing on programs like Soul of Reason tonight helps and I imagine you've given lectures about this but what about the Food and Drug Administration ?What about the Federal Trade Commission? Should not they have the manufacturer of this laundry starch to put across the box in big letters: do not eat. This may be dangerous to your health. They do it for cigarettes. Why can't they do it for laundry starch?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:10:15.200
Well I have approach many of these agencies in fact. The NAACP at the present time is approaching petitioning the FDA concerning this material. The Downstate Medical students, the Daniel Hale Williams society, in fact have produced the first pamphlet are to make people aware that eating the starch is dangerous to your health. But it seems like to move on a health problem. It is one of the most difficult things especially if people are not dropping off like flies and dying. It's all right with people look sick, are sick, spend millions of dollars on and health moneys, but to to bring an end to this thing through education, it seems like it's very difficult. So it's a maverick job right now. In fact appearing on this show has really- to reach the millions of people that might be listening is really a a plus for us. But the main thing here is that we have to educate the people. I'm sure that if the people knew that this starch is unsanitary, that it does have many bacteria and germs and it that it does cause anemia, in fact all the people I've spoken to so far they say immediately, well I'll stop eating it, because I don't need it. But they don't know these things and so we have to hit the population for it. I don't think just putting a sign on a box is going to be important, that important because I find out that people don't pay too much attention the signs. I think it's more important that the medical- Black medical profession get out there and white medical profession and educate the people concerning the the health ailments at this, eating this material will cause. It's a, for example I had a recent, with one of the people in the city on consumer fraud, and they told me that they had called up the major supermarkets and they found out that the major supermarkets did not sell this starch to anybody. And I told them well they are sampling is wrong and therefore their statistics are wrong because people don't go to supermarkets to buy this particular laundry starch, they go to their little stores in their area and I can take them to every little store in South Jamaica and Harlem and they'll find, when they don't find bread on the shelves, they'll find a row of starch on the shelf. And each of those people who own those stores will tell you those people eat that particular starch and they'll laugh about it and so forth. So they'll say I don't know why they eat it but they go out the store putting it in their hands and taking handfuls of it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:12:38.210
Now of course you've identified a number of problems in dealing with both the Black community and the larger community involving health. For example you said that people don't really get into a health problem until such time as people begin to die like flies. Well the fact is that probably the largest killer of people in this society is lung cancer. And people are still smoking cigarettes although there are some anti cigarette programs and there is a warning on the boxes and packages and the like. On the other hand you did point out but it does require an organized effort-

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:13:10.310
Definitely.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:13:10.312
-which you and others in the medical profession are trying to develop. Probably the first part of this is awareness information which is what we are doing tonight. But then past information it does require action which includes such things as putting a warning on the box different such things as possibly educating the people who sell these products to impress upon people that this is not meant to be eaten. This is meant to be used for literally laundry purposes. Also what about the manufacturer? Is this a product is manufactured by many companies or is there one particular company that manufactures it?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:13:47.030
Yes there's one company in Chicago and they manufacture the Argo laundry starch which is the one that's mostly eaten by the Black female. And I'm sure with their marketing expertise, because they market other products in this particular company, they are aware that this starch is not being used as a laundry starch. You've got to realize that this is a very crude laundry starch that has gone out with the new spray starches with the new liquid starches and so forth. And yet if a company is selling millions of boxes of this a year not only in this country but throughout the world, you can imagine you'd have to say to yourself, well are they aware of what's being done with this particular product? And then when you go into white areas and try to find a box about this particular laundry and you can't find it but then you can go into any small Black area and pick it up for the particular price to you that they charge for it. Then you start thinking, well is this something that's just being pointed out toward the Black area or being being sold in the Black area? I think these statistics are extremely important to get. I think that the company is important to find out and let them know that the people are eating this. But I have gotten contact with the company and spoken to them in Chicago and they told me they're aware that people eat this particular material.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:15:02.301
Tonight on Soul of Reason we are talking with Dr. Gerald Deas, medical doctor, internist at Jamaica Hospital, and we were talking about the characteristics that exist in many parts of the Black community in that significant numbers of people eat laundry starch to meet certain taste needs. But we are also pointing up that this relates to a high proportion of iron deficiency anemia among low income Black people. Now as you were saying, Jerry you've been in touch with the manufacturer and we have a box of the starch in front of us and as you can, as you can hear it that's the sound you're talking about. That's these hard substances I noticed on the back it's produced by a food company actually.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:15:47.600
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:15:48.501
It would appear to me it's the best foods company in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. It would appear to me that if the citizens identified this is a problem and wrote to this company and demanded that the company issue some kind of warning both to the stores that sell it and print one on the box something would be done about it because I think you've pointed out very clearly that it is a significant health problem, not that the company is intentionally promoting this as food but if it's a characteristic. And as you say if it's disproportionately available in the minority community then something should be done about it, because it is certainly is a serious health problem.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:16:26.871
Definitely. In fact all they would have to do is to refine this starch to a point where they made it in a very fine powder and the people wouldn't even want it. All right. As I said before the most characteristic thing that you will ask the average starch eater, the laundry starch eater, is the crunchiness is a very characteristic need that they have to have a bite down on it. They almost tell you they feel the puff of it in their mouth and so forth. So I think that this is another thing that they could do. I'm not saying the products should be removed off the market if it's being used for laundering, fine. But if people are using it to eat and causing such devastating effects, in fact, I can only say this that the studies that should be coming out of all of this will be on low birth weight of babies who people eat this. I.Q. studies of the children of mothers who eat this particular thing and here's a common denominator that people have been doing for 50 years. How many mothers I have eaten this stuff through 50 years and might have been affecting their children? So this is what this- I'm so glad that this program has taken time to point out this very important health problem.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:17:31.101
Now the brochure that has been developed, Laundry Starch and Anemia, has been prepared and distributed by the Daniel Hale Williams Society which is a Black and Hispanic student association at the Downstate Medical Center, State University of New York. To me this is an example of the type of responsibility that minority people who go into the medical professions should assume. In other words this group of people together with you and some of your colleagues have developed a very interesting brochure which people in the audience might obtain by writing to the Daniel Hale Williams Society, the State University of New York Downstate Medical Center 450 San Avenue. And that's in Brooklyn, New York. And there is a brochure which the audience could get free of charge because I am sure you're trying to extend the awareness of this problem to the larger community. Now in the case of treating iron deficiency anemia I note from the brochure that the key thing is to improve your diet and you point up here eating green leafy vegetables, liver and other meats, dried fruits, eggs. And to me this is just the typical balanced diet.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:18:44.581
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:18:44.962
Which then leads me to ask you what are you doing, what are other Black physicians doing, other physicians working with the Black community doing to help Black people in general to improve their nutrition, to improve their basic health?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:18:59.030
Well one of the things that are, that have has been cut say in the health department in New York City for example, has been the nutritionist. I had a meeting with them Dr. Pasquale Perrotta, the new commissioner there, and his health education staff. And it's amazing, but the cuts that they have had in their department just on nutrition is, you can't go to an average place or any person in the city and find a nutritionist that they can sit down and talk to and so forth about their diets and things like this. I almost think that it has to be shows such as this or media such as the newspapers that the average person read, that will publish diet, that will publish things that contain iron that will publish things that will give them anemia if they eat and so forth. In fact the Amsterdam News did run a first page article on this particular thing of eating laundry starch, which I was very happy that they did, because I told them they put it on page 27, it will be lost. So they did put it on the first page and I think that this has had a certain amount of impact. But it's more than this it's an ongoing education. It's a you can't let it die. Sickle cell anemia is one of those problems that still face us in just large amounts of patients. And as you see over the over a couple of years it has taken a quite a dip in and around people talking about it. Radio shows having it on. And yet these patients are still suffering from sickle cell anemia. They still have all the disease problems, the social problems and so forth. And yet you see no programs having it. And I think it's mainly because, if it's not hot everything dies on, and so this is one program. However in the starch eating that I hope to keep hot for a while until I have every person- Black person in America know that eating this will give them anemia number one and whether I can improve the next generation by letting these females stop eating this particular material.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:20:51.720
Of course when you get into diet you do get into some first serious types of problems. For example a number of people trying to lose weight and as you know hypertension is probably the number one killer in the Black community. And weight and diet, obesity and diet, diet probably contribute as much to hypertension as to anything. Yet diet is has so many fads surrounding it. For example we have weight reduction diet and now a number of people have become vegetarians. Whereas it's certainly possible to eat a very fine diet from a vegetarian point of view. Some of the things that are being done really are very unhealthy. And so somehow or another if you write something in a very dramatic way, particularly if you're an entertainer, and you say something about diet you get all kinds of people to doing all kinds of things. I imagine that must be very frustrating to a physician.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:21:44.601
It's very frustrating. In fact there as you know that the diets are low, high water diets, low, high protein diets and so forth. The water diets and things these are out there and people constantly get on and off them. Thank goodness they get off them often enough. But there's one other thing I like to bring up, just about just diet. For example in Africa where the mainstay foods are cassava yam and cabbagem they have found that the Sickle Cell person, for example, the one who has sickle cell anemia has less difficulty with their disease in the Africa eating this particular diet than those who come to the Western civilization, that eat the Western diet. And they have found that in these three foods the common denominator is thiocyanates. Now these thiocyanates are found in these three foods. Over years people have selected these foods as good diet, diet materials. Now thiocyanate, these have been found by Rockefeller Institute to prevent sickling and also to reverse sickling. So here, but they didn't find it on the basis of diet. They found it on the basis of physical chemistry that these particular thiocyanates can prevent sickling and here our whole culture has chosen a certain foods that will prevent sickling and reverse sickling. So you can see just how selective diets can be in a culture that can really be the best for them. And yet when they come to some place else and choose that particular diet they can get into trouble.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:23:08.061
On the other hand, as you said earlier in the show, cultural patterns of eating do not necessarily lead to good nutrition. For example eating starch and eating clay is a cultural pattern in some parts of the world as well. So that diet and eating does have a very important cultural significance, because so much of our rights of society, our rites of passage, our rights of marriage, our rights of death involve eating. But it doesn't necessarily follow that because something is found in a culture and a culture deals with it that they have selected it for good nutrition. I think that might be more accidental than purposes. But it does show that there is some benefit just as much of the research it indicates that people who eat low cholesterol diets generally tend to have a lower rate of coronary heart disease.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:23:58.811
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:23:59.721
So that your task as a medical doctor, I would think, is to continue to do what you're trying to do which is to educate the public. But beyond educating the public, it appears to me that the official health agency has some responsibility. For example in regard to laundry starch has the New York City Department of Health taken any action? Have they developed any brochures, have they developed any programs? And if they have, what have they done? If they have not, what are they to do about it?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:24:26.330
Well at the present time they have not developed any brochures. I'm in touch with them at the present time. They wish to do some more studies, epidemiological studies on the amount of people who eat it in New York. I feel that enough studies have been done. I feel that enough studies have been done throughout the world and now it's time to educate the people. I think that this study business puts us into a bind it loses, makes people lose interest in what they are attempting to do. I have enough documentation from so many medical journals that this has been a problem among Black people that I'm not willing to anymore, to waste any more time on studies. I'm willing to implement now education of the people to stop eating this particular [unclear].

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:25:04.432
Of course on the other hand, if you are a public official and this program costs, let's say, one hundred thousand dollars and it only affected five thousand people, you would be criticized very strongly. So therefore I think it is important for the agency to have some general idea as to how many Black people or Spanish people or any other people might be eating starch. In my opinion, if as you say, it's in these stores and so on. It shouldn't be too difficult to find this out.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:25:34.301
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:25:35.211
I agree that sometimes public agencies tend to drag their feet in doing things. On the other hand I don't think you can completely say that they shouldn't study the epidemiology of it not the fact that it's dangerous it certainly is dangerous but it may not be particularly widespread in New York City, right.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:25:53.570
Well there have been papers, Dr. Brown, already produced concerning the association of laundry starch and clay in New York City. And these papers have been done and this is out of the Archives of Internal Medicine. This is what I'm saying, I'm saying there's so many papers have been done right here in New York on pica and starch eating and so forth, that are, that I don't think it's that we have to spend that much time now to develop how many more people eat it at the present time. So as I as you see right there in a particular paper they've already made a study right here in New York on this particular thing. In fact they've been PhD theses done by Black students who have gotten their PhD theses right here in New York on starch eating, so it has been in depth studies of this problem already. That's why I said I don't have enough time now to waste on more studies as such.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:26:42.210
You know I can see your point. The only problem with that is that you don't run the health department. And since the health department is run by these officials, we have to keep the pressure on them so they will complete these studies and begin to get some public activity on them. Again I would like to suggest to the audience that if they are interested in getting some more information on this they should contact the Daniel Hale Williams Society at the State University of New York Downstate Medical Center at 450 Clarkes and Avenue and that's Brooklyn, New York. In terms of your work on sickle cell, very briefly Jerry, are you still involved in that ore you spending most of your time now on the laundry starch problem?

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:27:22.970
No, Dr. Brown, I belong to an association known as the Sickle Cell Victims, an organization which is made up of sickle cell patients and is these with the full blown disease. So I'm in contact every day almost with these with these patients. In fact this organization is not so much geared on finding the cause of sickle cell anemia so much as to help them in their social problems. In fact all the moneys we raise we give to the families of sickle cell patients, because we find out that they have such an overbearing economic stress and social stress with this particular disease that finances are extremely important. So I'm as active today as I was five years ago when I wrote a song called A Black Child Who Can't Smile, concerning sickle cell anemia.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:28:07.520
I say, you are really an example of the type of thing that a Black medical person should be doing. You're alert in your profession at the same time you're trying to mobilize the community, and all of the rest of the profession to deal with the particular problems. Our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason has been Dr. Gerald Deas, who is a physician at the Department of Internal Medicine at Jamaica Hospital. And we were discussing tonight the effect of the intake of laundry starch, which is an endemic nutritional pattern where certain Black parts of the Black population on their health, on iron deficiency anemia, on some of the problems of young children when they are born. Again, Jerry, I'd like thank you for being our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Dr. Gerald Deas 00:28:52.310
Thank you very much.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:53.991
You've been listening to Soul of Reason with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

