Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.380
Over 400 New York City high school students participate in the Executive High School Internship of America program. Hear Kathleen Bullock, Terry Smith and Mark Millander discuss this exciting program on tonight's SOUL OF REASON. [intro music begins]

Announcer 00:00:38.080
This is SOUL OF REASON: a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:02.560
With us this evening on SOUL OF REASON are three exciting young people who are participating in the New York City Executive High School Internship Program which is part of a larger program to provide opportunities for high school students to do some exciting work in their area of interest. Our guests are Kathleen Bullock, Terry Smith and Mark Millander. And Mark, suppose you begin by telling us what the purpose of the program is and who the sponsors of the program are.

Mark Millander 00:01:30.610
Well I think to state the ... the express purpose of the program would ... would require a large scale; and what I'd like to start first by saying that the head of the program, Dr. Hirsch, who started the program from inception, has helped, you know, the internship become what it, you know, what it is today. And the director, Mr. Fred Durant, is part ... you know, in part, head of the program and has helped tremendously with, you know, with ... with the interns and ... and recruiting sponsors here and around the city.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:13.360
Now I gather that all of you are high school students who are actively enrolled in high school; and for this particular term -- over the past term -- you have been assigned to an industry, or to an organization, to do some work. Now, for example where do you work Mark?

Mark Millander 00:02:31.870
Well I am presently ... interning is what they call it. They prefer to [CROSSTALK]...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:37.150
That's a very good point because it's not a paid job it's really part of your education.

Mark Millander 00:02:41.140
And I'm interning with Johnson Publishing Company under the auspices of my sponsor Mr. Carl R. Douglas [phonetic] who is the one of the five associate editors for EBONY magazine headed by Mr. Johnson.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:55.480
And Kathleen where are you interning? Since I see you every week, I know. But let's tell our audience.

Kathleen Bullock 00:03:02.201
Well I'm here at NBC radio and my sponsor is Perry Bascombe [phonetic] the vice president general manager of local radio.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:09.160
And Terry where are you interning?

Terry Smith 00:03:10.191
UNIQUE NEW YORK Magazine published by Vy Higginsen, and my sponsor is [INAUDIBLE], assistant to buy.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:19.060
I see. I noticed that each one of you mentioned a sponsor. And I guess Kathleen that means that's the person you're responsible to, or the person who sort of looks out for you when you go to that assignment.

Kathleen Bullock 00:03:30.360
Yeah. That['s] a person that more or less develops our internships, where we are; and they give us the background that we need when we come to a place of business and they show us around and guide us.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:45.101
Now you all are very impressive young people. What high schools do you attend? What high school do you attend Kathleen?

Kathleen Bullock 00:03:50.110
I attend John Bowne High School in Queens.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:54.010
And Terry, where do you go to high school?

Terry Smith 00:03:55.240
Also John Bowne.

00:03:56.591
Well let's see do we break this [laughter/CROSSTALK].

Mark Millander 00:03:58.870
Yes I'm attending Charles Evans Hughes High School.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:02.380
I see and what are some of the other assignments that some of the young people have that you've heard about Mark?

Mark Millander 00:04:07.990
Well I've heard about assignments from lawyers, or lawyers' assistants. As interns act, you know... that's I think... that's their primary... that's our primary responsibility, you know, acting as a special assistant to people in and around the, you know, the office or whatever it happens to be. And I've met people from dentists to lawyers to people like Kathleen herself, and Terry. Most people... most people that I've been associated with, you know, people from the journalism business -- people you know from... from journalists or journalism magazines. I'm sorry -- and, you know, the internship I think... the internship gives everyone a unique opportunity of, you know, of getting an experience that you would not have gotten otherwise, you know, in a school environment; and gives the student a unique opportunity -- an opportunity he wouldn't have got in a school environment. And it gives it, you know... it gives the student a tremendous amount of responsibility.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:12.130
Now when you have this internship assignment do you go to school at all or is your internship your school? What about that Terry?

Terry Smith 00:05:20.680
You do go to school. You go back to school. They have back to school days; and you go back, I think, about two times a month, or something like that; but usually you don't go back to school.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:33.250
And the idea, I guess, is that they feel that you have enough skill and ability and some good work attitudes to be able to, in a sense, be on your own because it seems to me as though it's like a regular job: you have to show up at a certain time and you have an assignment, and then you leave at a certain time. How were you selected Kathleen?

Kathleen Bullock 00:05:53.470
Well I think the spot, I mean, coordinator came around [to the] schools and she's [she] discussed the program; and I got interested in it; and you get screened, you know; and I think they base it on your personality and whether or not you can accept responsibility; because it is a lot of responsibility to come out of high school and to go into a working experience. And after they screen you then you have a lot of interviews with executives -- or so-called executives, or whatever -- and then they let you know if you've been picked. And I was one of the lucky ones.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:30.880
Now in selecting you: is it based in part on what you've done before? I noticed you work at NBC radio here. And when I first saw you I just thought that you were a new employee. You were working so efficiently and, you know, handling the various things that you have to handle. Did you have previous media experience or did this happen because you were bright and intelligent and personable ... that the NBC radio selected you?

Kathleen Bullock 00:07:00.940
It was rather odd how I came to NBC because I was interested in law; and this was one interview that she had: so she says, "Well you seem the type of person that's outgoing so I'll send you here. They want some body that is outgoing and that can change up because you will be dealing with five different executives or managers." So I told her okay. And so I came and they said that I was the type of person that they was looking for.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:29.740
Well how did you get selected Terry? Or how did you select UNIQUE NEW YORK?

Terry Smith 00:07:34.510
Well first of all I was supposed to go to another internship; and it ... I wanted to do journalism and they didn't really have any place for me. And one day my coordinator, she called me up, she says, "Well, I don't know if you would like to go here but we have UNIQUE NEW YORK magazine," and I subscribe to it, and everything, so I was really excited. So I went there and fell in love with everybody there. So ...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:02.031
Of course Vy Higginsen is a very fantastic person.

Terry Smith 00:08:04.331
Yes, she is.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:04.940
And you run into a lot of interesting things. Mark, how did you get your assignment?

Mark Millander 00:08:11.560
Well it was my ... my assignment happened to be a very unique one in that there had been previous interns at EBONY; however, they had, you know, they hadn't been any interns like myself who had partaken in travel experiences. And in that, you know, being that I was a different intern... a model intern, I guess you could say for EBONY, I was selected on the basis of my ... my past reception. And, you know, what I had ... what I had to offer, you know, to EBONY as an intern. And of course, you know, what I was as a person. And I think they select interns on the basis of their personality and their outward appearance. I guess they're ... they're independent, you know, their feeling towards their, you know, their vocation.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:05.940
The thing that I find very interesting about this is that there's a lot of criticism of education in New York City and elsewhere. A lot of criticism of high school ... a lot of criticism of young people. And yet we have a program with 400 high school students in it; working independently doing some very, very exciting things. So what I'd like to ask you -- and I think I'll begin by asking Terry -- is what did your high school education do to help prepare you for this? Because obviously you are well prepared and you're doing very well. And since you did go to high school -- you went to John Boune in this instance -- your high school education must have done something to help get you ready for this.

Terry Smith 00:09:42.070
Right, well I ... I wanted to go into journalism so I've taken most of the English courses in school; and I've never got a chance to get on the school newspaper. So this was a way for me to be out there and experience it, you know, and give me what I needed to find out. Because I really wasn't confident I didn't think I could do it, you know. But after I got there the responsibility was placed on me and I was doing pretty good under pressure.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:10.540
Well what proportion of young people in this executive internship program are minority group young people? Do you have an idea? Is it most of them? Half of them?

Terry Smith 00:10:21.020
It's about half, isn't it?

Kathleen Bullock 00:10:22.301
No it's mixed it's ... they come from ... a lot of them just come from different backgrounds. A lot of them just come from different backgrounds.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:29.631
They probably represent a cross-section. [CROSSTALK] That's probably it. Now, for many of you I guess, this is your last week, or thereabouts, on the internship program. What about you Terry do you have another term to go?

Terry Smith 00:10:44.270
No I graduate. Thank God.[Laughter]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:48.831
What about you, Mark?

Mark Millander 00:10:49.820
Well I graduate also and...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:52.580
Which is the next sta... the next step.

Mark Millander 00:10:57.160
It's actually... yes... it's actually... right... you're right. It's the next step; and I've got very good recommendations; and I've talked to a few people from the hierarchy there in Chicago and they tell me that, you know, a college education would benefit me tremendously and it wouldn't be a tremendous asset for me.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:16.400
Because this is one of the things that's happening now: a lot of young people are saying, "Do I need to go to college? Should I go to college." And particularly since you're in the world of work now, you begin to get an idea as to how much more training you need and what you need to major in. For example Kathleen I believe you are thinking about going to Northwestern. Is that right?

Kathleen Bullock 00:11:35.990
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:36.311
To major in journalism, I believe; which is sort of a turnaround from your original interest in law.

Kathleen Bullock 00:11:41.580
Yeah, it is a big turnaround.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:42.113
How did that happen?

Kathleen Bullock 00:11:44.151
Well when I came here, I had to do a lot of writing. I like to write creatively; and the writing I have to do is what I call straight writing; and there's a lot of skills that I think that I need and I can obtain them in college more efficiently than I could in high school; because high school I really didn't care too much about the English grammar because I really didn't think it was necessary. And now I know that it is necessary. A lot of things that wasn't necessary to me before, is very important to me now.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:17.180
And Terry, of course you work at UNIQUE NEW YORK which is a magazine, which is well-known for its promotional activities including this discourse [phonetic] which is where I run into you on occasion. What else do you do other than give discourse [phonetic] in New York.

Terry Smith 00:12:30.891
Well I work in editorials, basically; and I have to assign articles -- assign assignments rather -- to our writers and photographers; and I have to type up the articles and take them to the editor in chief; and I do ... I just do basically editorial work.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:55.401
And finally Mark what's your responsibility?

Mark Millander 00:12:57.560
Well my responsibility as a special assistant to both EBONY and JET associate editors, is to research ... do research -- as you know research is an ... is an integral resource often used by journalists to obtain background history on a person or persons, you know, personal progressions [phonetic]. And I'd like to point out that, you know, it's not ... it's not only research, but research is ... is a basic fundamental used by ... often used by a journalist.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:30.450
Now Mark what kind of research have you done? I think your point is well taken that research is a key part of journalism, as journalism is based on facts, because you have to have facts before you develop attitudes and impressions. Give an example of one kind of research that you've done.

Mark Millander 00:13:44.210
Well I've done research on ... on ... on various number of people: people from all walks of life. And to give one example would be: I did research on three top Black entrepreneurs -- you know, from, you know, from ... from the New York City ... from ... from the nation's standpoint of view -- and they were ... they were on, for example, Mildred Montgomery of Garland Foods, Inc. and Mr. George E. Johnson of Johnson Products, Inc.; and Mr. Henry Parks of H.G. Parks, Inc. And the research was done on these top Black entrepreneurs because we -- my sponsor and I -- had anticipated, you know, writing a piece or two on these gentlemen.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:34.130
Now in doing this research did you get a chance to meet these people?

Mark Millander 00:14:37.620
Yes. I did get ... get a chance to meet these people and they gave me a briefing on, you know, their assets and what they had anticipated for the, you know, for the next fiscal year.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:51.540
Of course one of the advantages of a program like this is meeting people. I know here at WNBC radio you meet a variety of people. Kathleen can you tell us about some of the people you've met? And what's your reaction? What's been your reaction in terms of your sponsor and the various people ... how have they accepted you and so on?

Kathleen Bullock 00:15:10.340
Well I think the people at NBC have accepted me ... pretty well; and it's kind of hard because, I look ... they probably ... some people would look at me as just being an ordinary high school student -- a little teenager -- but I think it's the approach that you give them. And so far everybody's been warm to me and nice. And one person that I met here, while she was doing a taping, was Sister Alma John; and she was a very nice lady. And I met various people but it was, just like ... just initial contact.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:46.990
All right what do you think about the media industry? You're in one of the busiest radio stations in America. What do you think about it? You think it's a tough job? Do you think it's something you'd like to get into? And if you would like to get into it what phase of it would you like to get into?

Kathleen Bullock 00:16:01.440
Radio to me seems like a challenge, especially here it's a big challenge because it's a lot of pressures and deadlines that you have to meet and you have to be up to certain people and everything. I would like to go [into] radio in the advertising or community affairs because there's a lot of things that people do outside the world and in their communities that a lot of people don't hear about. And I think that it should be known: the problems that many people face in life.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:31.470
Now some of your writing, I believe, is involved with community affairs. Have you written anything that's actually been on the air?

Kathleen Bullock 00:16:36.720
Yes some of my PSA (Public Service Announcements), for ... where a non-profit organization send in whatever is happening that week or two weeks from then. And then I'd take it and write it up and put it on the air.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:51.540
Okay, well we'll give you an actual on-the-air test. While I talk with Terry, I want you to write a brief PSA extolling the virtues of the high school internship program. So you can do that while I talk to Terry about what you gain from your experience at UNIQUE NEW YORK.

Terry Smith 00:17:07.020
Well I've gained firsthand knowledge of magazine publishing which is really ... exciting; and the people ... I found other people were also interested in journalism which makes it nice to see as everybody else is into it. And from the parties that we've given I've met so many people, you know: Melba Moore and Dick Barnett and a lot of other famous people. And it's really ... I just love it. And I think I want to do DeVor's [phonetic] job. I keep telling her that ... she doesn't like that.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:40.650
Now where are you going ... what are you going to do after you graduate after you finish your internship?

Terry Smith 00:17:44.910
I'm going to look for a job and work until I go to school in September.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:48.440
Oh that's fine. Where do you think you're going to school and what are you going to major in?

Terry Smith 00:17:51.930
I want to go to Northwestern.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:54.001
Oh you too.

Terry Smith 00:17:56.280
Yes. I want to go to Northwestern. I think I want to major in English rather than journalism, and minor in journalism.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:03.890
In other words you want to be more of a creative writer -- not that journalism isn't creative -- but you want to do more general writing and narrative writing that type of thing. Now Mark you've been in this program for six months or so and you've attended Charles Evans Hughes High School which is right here in Manhattan. A question I want to ask you and I'm sure you've thought about it is do you think some kind of internship program would be a desirable experience for every high school student? What do you think about that?

Mark Millander 00:18:35.100
I think it should. I remember going out on interviews and we do ... we do give ... we do go back to the school after the internship is over and explain to an audience of seventh and eighth termers -- which is what the internship accepts -- and we explain to them what the program is about and the actual benefits of the program. And in explaining that, I explain personally the benefits that I've reaped from the program and how it can benefit them in so many, you know, so many different ways ... so many various ways. And it's a unique opportunity that they wouldn't get otherwise, coupled with the responsibility.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:17.901
The thing that I find interesting is that in this modern world where there's so many things happening: there're people who needed to be ... to work in nursing homes and need to work in recreation centers and child care centers and the like -- well why it is that there aren't more internship programs coming out of the schools? Now someone may say that young people aren't mature enough, or it requires too much supervision, but basically, as I understand it, your supervision is by someone who's at the place where you're placed. And you are basically responsible for yourself. Now is it the fact that some high school students aren't as mature as you young people and can't handle it? Or do you think it is a question of ... just the leadership that the students get in high school in terms of making these selections ... or the question of both?

Mark Millander 00:20:05.130
I think it's a question of both; and that the latter ... the one ... the latter I think is ... is ... has been the most problem. I think the counselors -- the guidance counselors -- in particular, tend to be an impediment to the students because, you know, they feel that the program might, you know, it might damage the student's record and some, you know, in some ways...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:30.700
That doesn't really seem too logical because I do know a number of guidance counselors and they do seem to be interested in their students. And when you say they appear to be an impediment I think what you mean is that they aren't too eager to let everybody go out there and you say it might be a ... might lead to a bad mark on the student's record. What is that? Because the student won't show up? And then he'll get a truancy record or something?

Mark Millander 00:20:51.532
Right, right... well some students will ... for some guidance counselors ... they don't feel that the students are ready to take on a tremendous responsibility [such] as an internship and the guidance counselors ... it's sometimes not the fault of the guidance counselors; but sometimes the guidance counselors tend to, you know, tell the student that the internship might sway them from what they actually want to do. And because the responsibility is so broad, you know, and it's away from the school that ... and it's away from the structural thing that you would ... the structural syvllist [phonetc ... syllabus?] ... or, you know symbalust [phonetic ... syllabus?] that you would get during a school semester. And it's only for a semester so you know it might set you back.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:37.550
In other words you really are saying ... as you said ... it's a combination of both; and in some instances the leaders in the school aren't particularly anxious to have certain young people go out on their own; and on the other hand I guess, because I notice Terry nodding her head, I guess that the maturity of the students is a key factor: that some students may not be mature enough to do this. And particularly since you depend upon the employer to do the supervision, the employer can be both an employer/supervisor and a father or a mother, which is what's required in some instances. How will you explain this experience, Terry, to your fellow classmates? What will you say about the experience? What will you say to them in terms of what they should be thinking about in their education?

Terry Smith 00:22:24.230
Well most students ... you have an idea of what you want to do; but you ... I think that experience ... if when you're out there and you get to be involved and interact with the people who are in the business world you really get to see, you know, if that's for you or not. Now if I got into journalism and got to UNIQUE and it wasn't for me then I would know, rather than going into college and majoring and everything like that; and I would tell them that it's really benefited me, because now I have the confidence. And I know that I will go into journalism and do it well.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:07.190
I think that you will; as a matter of fact I think that in all cases each one of you will be able to do what you intend to do. And of course you've learned one key thing, is ... as a matter of fact I will ask Terry again, while Kathleen continues to work on her PSA: what did you learn about individual discipline? Because discipline is a key factor in anything you do. We talk about becoming a championship basketball player or becoming a good lawyer or becoming a great dancer. For example when you go to the disco you see these new dances where everybody does the same thing, and makes the same turn. Well that's a form of discipline. Did this program help you with your inner discipline, your personal discipline? Or did you learn anything else about work?

Terry Smith 00:23:50.070
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:55.461
I'm sure you did. And then to ask the question like that ... what do you... Mark will .. has an idea and then I'll come back to Terry.

Mark Millander 00:24:02.835
Well I'd like to say that I've, you know, while ... while with Johnson Publishing ... and my ... my sponsors were under close scrutiny from not only me but their, you know, their respective supervisors. I'd have to say that my ... my sponsor, Cordell [phonetic] Thompson, who was a New York editor for JET, in particular has, you know, has ... has ... has helped me to develop and attain the gumption and assertiveness necessary to prepare for a career in journalism. And this, you know, this ... this is a number ... a number one factor in, you know, in helping me to further myself in ... in the journalism field and ... journalism circles.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:46.310
And the one thing about journalism, which both you and Terry can identify with -- and I guess Kathleen as well -- is the question of deadlines. See deadlines sort of fills in ... a kind of discipline that says, well look this is what I have to do by a certain particular period ... point in time. What about getting along with people? Did you learn anything about working with people in the world of work?

Terry Smith 00:25:10.940
Yes I have. Well lots of times we have to ... when we want ... we want ... when we want new writers ... we want ... we have to interview them and I've done some of that. And I have to know exactly what to say where I won't be offensive to someone. And ...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:28.250
In other words if somebody was not so good, and your question is how do you tell them that you don't want them to write. Well how would you tell them? [CROSSTALK] I've submitted ... I've written for UNIQUE NEW YORK on a couple of occasions. How would you tell me if I were submitting something you didn't want? And so how would you go about saying that in a very diplomatic way?

Terry Smith 00:25:44.801
I would probably say, well, "At this time we have no use for your material, but perhaps in a later date." [CROSSTALK ... laughter]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:55.620
Now that is really ... that's really a question of some learning [CROSSTALK]. It's true that you don't ... you don't want to lie to people. But on the other hand you don't want to go out of their way to hurt their feelings. And now we have a public service announcement prepared by Kathleen Bullock on the Executive High School Training Program. It's a very short one, but I think it's very important that you tell the young people and our audience about the program.

Kathleen Bullock 00:26:21.650
Well this is ... this is how I write the PSAs from the regular content; and this is how it goes. "WNBC young listeners ... are ... interested in a different kind of education are invited to apply to a productive experience as an executive high school intern, WNBC Cares."

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:42.950
That is beautiful. That is really outstanding. And to think that you did that in about three or four minutes; that just shows the type of improvisation that it takes to make this go. Now as we come toward the close of a program for each of you tell us in, one or two words, exactly what you think of the program. We begin with Mark.

Mark Millander 00:27:00.920
Well I think the program has been a tremendous benefit ... a tremendous asset to me as an intern.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:08.320
Okay, and Terry.

Terry Smith 00:27:10.281
It was beautiful. I love it. I wish I could do another term of it, really...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:14.642
Okay, and Kathleen.

Kathleen Bullock 00:27:15.681
I think it has helped me a lot and was very beneficial for what I want to do in the future.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:19.710
Our guest on tonight's SOUL OF REASON have been Kathleen Bullock, Terry Smith and Mark Millander, who have been participating in the Executive High School Internship Program which is part of a New York City Human Resources Administration program dealing with young people; giving them the opportunity to work in business ... business and industry and in the media; and to learn what the world of work has been like or is like. I'd like to thank you again for being our guests on tonight's SOUL OF REASON.

Announcer 00:27:46.920
You've been listening to SOUL OF REASON with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-African Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. [outro music begins] SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC public affairs department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

