Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:00:01.630
Why is "Black Creation" the most widely read magazine of Black literature today? What are the major themes in today's Black writing? What form of Black literature is most expressive of the Black experience? Hear Jim Walker, book editor of "Black Creation," discuss these topics on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:39.640
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:01:06.040
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" is Jim Walker, book editor and advertising manager for "Black Creation," a quarterly review of Black arts and letters. And Jim, I am sure the audience would be very interested in the reaction of the public to this magazine which deals with Black poetry, drama, art, music, etc.

Jim Walker 00:01:26.590
Well, I think we'd probably have to go back to the start of the magazine in the late 60s and I think the response then among the students was--was quite favorable. Students who wrote for the magazine were really very enthusiastic about it--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:01:39.461
[crosstalk] Now already you have said students. Now that means that this magazine is affiliated with some university connection?

Jim Walker 00:01:48.522
Yes, it's affiliated with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. It started out as a student publication, and has really moved away from being a student publication. It's now on nationwide circulation, it reaches out into Europe, into Africa, to the Caribbean. And I think that speaks for its response, for its popularity.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:02:09.850
Well, it is the only regularly published review of Black arts and letters in the nation--

Jim Walker 00:02:16.330
Yes it is.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:02:16.513
--Probably in the world, which says something itself, but then many people say well, why is it necessary to have a magazine that focuses specifically on Black writing and on Black arts?

Jim Walker 00:02:28.631
Well, [pause] that's a difficult question of course. I think one of the major reasons why it's so popular is that young writers, unknown writers, get their works published and find a good market, a good outlet for what they want to say, and that's one of the major reasons I think it's popular. In addition it's--it's--it covers just about every field of Black arts that you can think of. It covers theater, covers drama, covers music, covers poetry, short stories, fiction. And I think just because it's the only publication of that sort, it fills a need that people are looking for.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:03:07.092
When you say people does this mean Black people or white people or people interested in the arts generally?

Jim Walker 00:03:13.661
I would suppose our main readership is Black, but of course we go to many colleges around the univers--around the nation. I really don't know exactly what our readership would be, but I would think most of our readers would be Black. But we do get white writers writing in, we get responses from just all sorts of people.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:03:33.701
One of the things I think is certainly true and that is that Black arts is probably the most exciting things happening in the arts because it's an area which has been suppressed, the public hasn't heard very much about it, and is very expressive of the Black experience which comes out of this oppression. So as a result, artists who tend to be on the forefront of expression attempt to express themselves, and then people of a variety of backgrounds who want to know what's happening in the so-called "in- community" in the black art community read the magazine and look for the magazine. But in your opinion, what are the themes that are emerging from this literature that's being published, and you mentioned young writers. But I do know that you've had writers of significance such as James Baldwin and Johnny Williams, John Killens, Nikki Giovanni, writing for the magazine from time to time, and you've also featured interviews with some of the outstanding figures in the theater and in movies, people like Doug Ward of the Negro Ensemble Company. People like Gordon Parks of movie fame. So in a sense the magazine isn't just a vehicle, as I understand it, for young writers, although there is plenty of opportunity for them, it covers a whole range of people who are in the arts and that would lead me to say that if you looked at the magazine over several issues, you would probably have a pretty good idea of the emerging themes in today's Black writing and arts. What are those themes as you have seen them?

Jim Walker 00:05:08.771
Well, I think your statement suggests the variety that is in the magazine. As to themes, I think the themes run the gamut from concern...for how we live our lives to where are we going. How are we going to deal with the racism in the country? Concerns that are sometimes more narrow in the arts. How do you get money for theaters? How do you...gain publishing outlets? I'm not sure that I could easily say that there are any themes that...really emerge.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:05:50.860
Well, I've shown the magazine to several people, many of them white, and they say it seems to be a sort of a balance between love and anger, hope and anguish. In particular I think the thing that catches most people is the poetry, the poetry is [crosstalk] very graphic in terms of the layout of the magazine. It's laid out graphically as well. And it is very poignant and direct to these themes of love and anger and hope and despair. Is that your observation? Or because you tend to be more interested in books and essays, maybe you see the--the different themes emerging from those particular forms.

Jim Walker 00:06:36.850
Well, I would say when the magazine was first started we saw much more anger, and not that that anger still isn't present in the writings, certainly in the poetry. But I think new themes might be emerging. One of them is a discussion of love. I think a few years ago the poetry really didn't deal with love, it didn't deal with everyday concerns of--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:07:01.931
Well it dealt with love, love for black brothers, love your [crosstalk]

Jim Walker 00:07:06.041
Yes I think a lot was rhetorical. A lot was Black rhetoric.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:07:10.930
Well, is saying that you should love your Black brother rhetoric, or is that really a true statement?

Jim Walker 00:07:16.961
No--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:07:17.341
--Or a statement of feeling.

Jim Walker 00:07:19.150
I think it's certainly a statement of feeling. I think it's a true statement of course.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:07:23.560
But why would you characterize it as rhetoric?

Jim Walker 00:07:26.951
Well, when I say rhetoric, I mean the outward forms, the sort of standardized ways that emerged in the late 60s--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:07:35.682
Give an example.

Jim Walker 00:07:41.710
[pause] Well in the poetry, we've got a lot of poetry dealing with Black queens, Black kings. We got dozens and dozens and dozens of poems. We got some very good poems dealing with those kinds of themes, those kinds of images, and I think once that's done very well, then we perhaps need to move on to something else. What we didn't get in the early years were poems...were good love poems for example which we're now--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:08:07.002
Person to person love, rather than rather than collective love. Person to person love. Well, what about the themes that emerge in the essays? For example, many of the people who are writing essays come from various political orientations, particularly the nationalist orientation that Black people should collectively work on some particular attack against something in society that in most of this writing has been created by white people. Is this a very strong theme, or are the themes in the essays and the short stories more idiosyncratic along the line of love and anger and hope and so on?

Jim Walker 00:08:54.880
Well I'm not sure that you can--I think there is a tendency to always want to categorize and to say that things are this or that. I think we've we've seen a variety. I'm glad to see that variety, I'm glad to see that people are getting away from some of the categorized, sort of standard ways that were used a few years ago. I just sort of reject categorization, maybe that's just my own personal--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:09:24.893
That probably is a personal thing. We are talking with Jim Walker, book editor of "Black Creation," a quarterly review of Black Arts and Letters, and we are discussing this idea of just what forms of the arts tend to be most expressive at this time of the Black experience. We have poetry, we have short stories, we have essays. They are discussions about the dance and about the theater and about music. As you respond, as an editor of this magazine, which of these areas seem to be most vibrant at this particular point in time?

Jim Walker 00:10:02.801
Oh, I think clearly poetry. It has been, and I think it probably continues to be. I think a poem is perhaps the easiest thing for people to sit down and write, although there is a tendency to think that once you've written it down, then you need not do anything with it. Once the emotion comes out, it need not be edited or thought about again. That perhaps is a mistake, but certainly, poetry has been the most popular. For example, we ran a literary contest a year ago. And we got some six or seven hundred poems.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:10:38.953
Six or seven hundred poems in the literary--literary contest?

Jim Walker 00:10:42.131
As opposed to something like I think about 100 or so short stories and about ten to fifteen essays, so clearly poetry is the most popular. I think it's the most readily available, it's the easiest to...to write down immediately, it's the form that allows you to get your anger, your emotions, your love, your--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:11:00.610
Well, [crosstalk] that's true, because probably as you say it is is a little easier for poetry to be created. But when we talk about vibrance, I'm really talking about the way in which these particular art forms tend to be right on the nervous edge of what's happening in the Black experience. Which of these art forms, as reflected through what appears in the magazine, do you think is the most vibrant? And I didn't mention films, I know that you did your winter issue on Black films, probably the most comprehensive write up on Black films that's ever appeared in the press, short of a book. You also do photography, and I know that "Black Creation" ran a photography contest in which there was some really poignant photography. So when I ask the question, and I realize I'm pushing you, but in order to give our audience some idea of the vibrance of this magazine, I'd just like your reaction to which of these forms of Black art tend to be most expressive of the vibrance of the Black experience?

Jim Walker 00:12:06.780
Well, I still think I would stay with poetry, although as you've mentioned we've gotten some very fine photographs, we've gotten some very fine essays. In that literary contest we got some beautiful essays, poignant essays, pointed essays, but I still think poetry allows that immediate expression, which, for example, a short story doesn't, a short story takes a little more work. It takes more care, takes some knowledge of certain technical things, like point of view. Certain other things that you need not have to concern yourself immediately within the poetry. For example to take a good photograph, you have to know something about photographic techniques. Sometimes you can take a good photograph by merely going out with, you know, with a small camera. But I think...immediately you can deal with your problems, with your thought--excuse me--with your thoughts with your emotions, with those things that you--you feel intimately most directly in poetry.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:13:11.101
Well, you are doing exactly what I was going to ask you about next, and that is the role of criticism in the magazine. I know [crosstalk] that in addition to presenting the original works, there are sections that deal with criticism, in your instance, criticism of books, criticism of music, criticism of plays. How responsive has the Black artistic--and the White artistic community, for that matter --been to the critiques? Is "Black Creation" considered to be high on the level of criticism, or do the artists and the writers and the painters look forward to the criticism? Do they get annoyed with the criticism? Do they accept it? What has been the response in terms of the critical role of the magazine?

Jim Walker 00:14:00.080
Well I can say very happily that the response for example to the book review section has been pretty overwhelming. I get letters pretty regularly from people who either disagree with or wildly agree with or want to write book reviews which respond to a book review which has appeared. So I think that response has been been overwhelming, at least from readers. I think writers very seldom get a chance to have their writings criticized in--in a forum which really perhaps knows what they are dealing with and knows what they're about. And I think that's what "Black Creation" is. And I think the writers certainly look forward to it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:14:42.540
And that's very interesting, you said "knows what they're dealing with" and "knows what they're about." And my interpretation of that is because the writers of the magazine, the critics, are Black, and because they are looking at it from the Black perspective--now this is a cliché that's frequently used, that black critics and Black art [inaudible] look at it from the Black perspective. Could you give us an idea of what you mean by looking at something from the Black perspective?

Jim Walker 00:15:09.021
Well I think...of course that's a difficult question.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:15:15.830
Whenever you have to make explicit what is implicit it is difficult because, very easily, a few moments ago you said well they [stammering] writers and the...poets and so on respond to the criticism because they understand that we understand where they are coming from--

Jim Walker 00:15:34.641
[crosstalk] Well first of all...I'm a Black critic. I think that will give me an entree to the writers that will allow me a certain sympathy, I think, that would not be true perhaps with a white writer--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:15:47.750
Sympathy or empathy?

Jim Walker 00:15:51.200
Perhaps empathy is a better word. Sometimes sympathy, not in that very sloppy sense of the word sympathy, but yes a sense of simpatico, if we're going to use that word. I've been dealing with--with black writing for several years now, and I think what the writers are looking for is not only a sympathetic or empathetic ear, or person, but they're looking for someone who can criticize--criticize not meaning to find something negative about--but to analyze, to interpret, which is what I try to do in my book reviews. Not only to tell what in general the book is about but to really make some constructive comments, which speak to the writers, which also speak to the general readership...So a person could pick up the book and say yes I can read this book review and perhaps I'll know what it's about, what the book is about. But also speaking to the writers. I'm not sure that that's done very much in critical writing--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:16:54.890
[crosstalk] Well what about the allegation that is made sometimes and that is that Black critics will not criticize a Black work negatively, that they will always find something nice to say about it, because either they just don't want the negative criticism on the record, or else they are fearful of the political ramifications of any negative criticism they might give?

Jim Walker 00:17:18.421
Well I think that's obviously true, I think that certainly has been true, I suppose it continues to be true. When I first started writing my book reviews, I think there was a tendency for me to want to--to do that to find something positive all the time. I think many times I could find things which were positive which were good and I would begin to deemphasize the negative. As I've gained some expertise, as I've gained some feeling about being a book review editor, as writing book reviews, I've gotten very much away from that, and if there's a book that I don't like I feel that I would say that. Have you ever said it? Yes I have. [crosstalk]

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:17:56.941
--Put those books on the shelf and not review them--

Jim Walker 00:17:58.711
No, I have said it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:18:00.641
OK. That's one of the responsibilities of a critic, of a journalist. Now what about this whole area of support, the financial side.The magazine is sponsored by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University--

Jim Walker 00:18:18.032
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:18:18.812
--And does have readership from subscription and newsstand readership, but all magazines, including some of the very prestigious literary review magazines that have focused on what generally we call Western or white writing, have had difficulty surviving. What about the kind of support? Is there much support in the foundation community, in the business community, for a magazine of this type? And what are some of the other possible ways of keeping the magazine growing? Because as your magazine has been successful, you've had more and more manuscripts and more and more people want to be involved. Yet some of the times your pages--the number of pages--are limited by the financial circumstances that you might find yourself in.

Jim Walker 00:19:12.690
Well, first of all I should start off with a comment that any magazine, I think, except for very few, face severe problems. Our greatest response has been in terms of getting manuscripts. We've not had a great deal of trouble there. We have had trouble in two basic areas. Number one is is subscribers, people to pay for the magazine through subscriptions, rather than on newsstands, and then even a more severe problem, a more particular problem, is getting ads from the business community, getting ads from book publishers, from record companies. Your question points to this kind of question, how do we get more ads? I mean what does it what does the magazine do to--to really put itself in a good financial--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:20:03.411
To justify the support of the advertising community because with a circulation of about ten thousand--

Jim Walker 00:20:09.810
[crosstalk] About ten thousand.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:20:11.220
--You have a specialized group of people, and of course this is true in most literary magazines.

Jim Walker 00:20:16.621
Well it's beginning to be true more and more with most magazines. In general magazines have either been phased out or being-- [crosstalk]

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:20:23.252
Magazines of the nature of "Life" and "Look."

Jim Walker 00:20:24.901
Right like right, "Life" and "Look," which by the way had, "Life" had something like seven million subscribers, so just the subscribers or having the subscribers even a large number [crosstalk] could not survive, you know, won't help the magazine to survive will help but it won't make the magazine a financial success. We need ads. We need ads from book publishers, we need ads from record companies, we--we need ads from just about anybody who would want to subscribe to "Black Creation." Why would they want to put an ad in "Black Creation?" Number one, it reaches a particular audience. It reaches, I think, a highly literate, highly interested audience, it reaches an audience most interested in Black arts. I would think record companies would be particularly interested in that, since we do just about every issue an article, a critique, either on a book or on a Black musician. We always have interviews with...writers, with people involved with writing. We do articles on the dance. So I think that area which hasn't really expanded to the way I would like it to expand, in terms of ads, I think is is perhaps beginning to open up. I'm just undertaking now a campaign to get more ads for "Black Creation." And I would hope that there would be people in our audience that would...want to subscribe to "Black Creation" and would want to put ads in "Black Creation."

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:21:56.360
Well what about on the editorial end? I know that you're the book editor and Jim Barry is the--

Jim Walker 00:22:05.130
Editor--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:22:05.581
--Editor in chief, and Laura Harris Hurd is an associate editor, and Fred Beaufort who helped to start the magazine is on the West Coast, is the West Coast editor. Is there any difficulty in attracting competent and interested editorial people? Because you've already described that you literally have hundreds of manuscripts coming in, many of them unsolicited but I would imagine some of them solicited, but producing a magazine aside from the business phase of it, the circulation and advertising, the setup. There's also a tremendous amount of work involved in the editing, the layout, there's a decision on your manuscripts. Do you have a sufficient number of people coming in to become involved in this, both as a training ground, and possibly as a professional activity on their part?

Jim Walker 00:23:02.440
Well you never have as much as you would like, obviously, you always want more people to work with you. But I think I can safely say that the best area has been the editorial area. You mentioned the name Fred Beaufort is the person who started "Black Creation" in the late 60s, and he worked very hard, along with several other people, and over the years we've had good editorial response. I think that the most troublesome area with "Black Creation" now is perhaps not with the editorial end, although as I say we could use more, you know, some more help. But I think the major area is getting the magazine out to the stands, letting people know about it. For example, we get many people saying to me, "Well, this is a fantastic magazine. I've never seen anything like it, I'm wildly supportive of it." I say, "Well have you taken a subscription?" They say, "Well, no." And I say well, why haven't you? You know--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:23:50.942
[crosstalk] And you reach into your little bag and pull out a subscription form.

Jim Walker 00:23:53.222
Right, right. And I say, you know, pass the copy along to--to a friend, pass a subscription blank along to a friend. And this is what we need. We need ads, we need more people to know about "Black Creation." That takes money of course. And I think the tendency to think because we're attached with a place like the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at the University, at New York University, that we have a great deal of money, that's simply not true. And a magazine needs to survive on its own, it needs to be self-sufficient, which-- Well do you think that the interest that has been catalyzed by "Black Creation," and its success, will stimulate other groups of interested writers, interested artists, to attempt to develop magazines, or do you feel that there will be a movement to get more coverage of Black arts and Black literature in the prevailing magazines? Of course when you say "the prevailing magazines," other than the Saturday Review and a couple of others, there are not really that many magazines that specifically deal with the arts. So I guess-- [crosstalk] what I would be asking is, would the success of "Black Creation" stimulate other Black-oriented magazines in the literary and artistic vein? Well, I would hope so. I think competition is certainly necessary. I think, you know, you need to see--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:25:17.821
Not just competition but outlets, because if you have hundreds of manuscripts and you're only able to publish, you know, ten, fifteen--

Jim Walker 00:25:25.321
A limited number.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:25:26.041
A limited number, it would appear that there must be a tremendous groundswell of talent that needs to be published. Of course this is true about any writer of any color or any background--

Jim Walker 00:25:39.121
His market is limited whether he's Black or white. It's much more limited for the Black writer and that was one of the main reasons why Black creation was started--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:25:46.201
You say it's more limited. Is that because of the quality of his writing or because of the general lack of interest in the part of some general magazines in Black topics, or Black writing?

Jim Walker 00:25:56.880
Well I think it's a twofold thing. What you say, the general lack of interest by many magazines to publish Black writers, but then also many Black writers feel hesitant to send their manuscripts into a white publication. They first of all may not know the right one to send it into, they may not feel that they receive a receptive response that they'll be looked at. And I think that kind of thing has been at least not true with "Black Creation." You asked a question, will more and more Black magazines begin to appear? Yes, I think you see new Black magazines appearing all the time. I don't think, however, you see many magazines which are particularly devoted to the arts. More and more of those need to appear. Yes, certainly true. And probably the reason why not more magazines are devoted to the arts specifically is because of the very problem you talked about before--earlier and that is a problem of maintaining the magazines in terms of financial support [crosstalk] and advertising support because these types of magazines tend to be very widely read and accepted by people who are interested in criticism, but at least to date have not had this wide readership. On the other hand, some of your articles at least seem to be very popular ,written in a popular vein, photographed, illustrated in a popular vein, and it's true that as you get more coverage, you may be able to increase your readership even more. OK. I see we're just at our time. I would like to encourage everybody to buy "Black Creation" magazine. Subscribe to it and...read us.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:27:40.003
Well, they can get it by contacting the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at 10 Washington Place in New York City.

Jim Walker 00:27:46.390
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown,  Jr 00:27:46.721
And this would give them the opportunity to see this excellent exploration of Black arts and letters. I'd like to thank Jim Walker, book editor of "Black Creation" quarterly review of black arts and letters, for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason." Thank you Jim.

Jim Walker 00:28:02.801
Thank you very much.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:03.850
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason," with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American African Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

