Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:02.330
Only three percent of the nation's journalists are from minority groups. The NYU AEJ summer journalism workshop provides opportunities for minority students to explore the field of journalism. Hear Pat Patterson and Fatima Shaik discuss this exciting and worthwhile program on tonight’s "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper intro 00:00:40.530
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:07.440
Our guests on tonight’s "Soul of Reason" are Pat Patterson who is Editor-at-Large at Black Enterprise Magazine and Fatima Shaik who's on the staff of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Fatima acts as coordinator of our AEJ Summer Journalism Program and Pat acts as a principal consultant and instructor in the course which the students take. Glad to have you both with us tonight.

Fatima Shaik 00:01:29.131
Thank you.

Pat Patterson 00:01:29.133
Glad to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:30.571
Well Pat maybe you can begin to discuss with our audience the purpose of the NYU AEJ Summer Journalism Program. You've been with the program about four or five years now and we have served some seventy-five or eighty minority journalism students in that period of time. So possibly you could tell us the purpose and then we can begin to discuss more about the details of the program.

Pat Patterson 00:01:55.830
Well the program itself is called Journalism and Minoritie sand as you've indicated we've had some seventy-five young people throughout the country come through the program. And one of the interesting things about the selection of the students reach program is that we usually end up with nine or ten young people from a candidates list of some 200. So you know they're rather remarkable young people and almost all of them have acquitted themselves just brilliantly for the most part. But the purpose of the program really is to expose these young people to the real world of journalism and some of the kinds of problems, challenges, and opportunities that they will have as minority journalists in a predominantly white society. And some of those there are obviously problems but we frequently try to talk of those problems in quotes as challenges as opportunities that we don't want them to bemoan the fact that they are Black or Chinese or Hispanic. We understand that there are problems but because they're communicators and that's whether in print or radio or television they have a unique opportunity in this media conscious world to do something about that kind of situation. And for that reason we bring in top flight journalists Black and Hispanic and largely minority. But we do also include white journalists as well to expose these young people to a broad spectrum of contacts. Number one because that's one of the really interesting sidelights about this they begin to rub shoulders with people who are really doing it. And so far it's turned out very well.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:05.850
Fatima you've been with the program for about the past six months. You're graduate student at New York University, a former reporter for The New New Orleans Times-Picayune. You had really the main responsibility you have presently the main responsibility for getting these young people associated with their jobs. So possibly you could tell us about the type of internships that these students go into, how they're selected, and what is expected of them on their jobs.

Fatima Shaik 00:04:35.820
Well most of the students are sent in preliminary applications from their applications they're judged by grades and their biographies. And after we pick students for the program they're taken to different publishing houses and public relation firms in New York area. There hopefully they can get some kind of on the job experience that'll help them break into into the public relations field or the field of journalism. And it's very hard for them to break into New York especially New York is a little bit tighter. Hopefully that students can learn from their experiences here what really is involved with working in the communications field.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:21.940
I believe this year you had some 300 applications from minority journalism students from all over the country who are juniors. Now what is the main reason for limiting this program to juniors why not seniors why not sophomores.

Fatima Shaik 00:05:36.540
Well primarily we pick juniors sometimes sophomores and seniors are considered. But I do believe that by picking juniors they can work for the summer right before they graduate and by working before they graduate they can see if there's anything else they need to brush up on when they go back into school. They can sort of get a pace of the work before they graduate so they know what they're getting into after they graduate.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:01.730
Now I believe the Journalism Council which is an organization of professors of journalism is one of the sponsors of this program along with New York University. And Dr. Lionel Barrow who's a friend of Pat and mine [right, laughter] was probably the major catalytic force behind getting this program going which involves getting jobs summer jobs in the media in magazines like Newsweek or Women's Day, Redbook or in public relations firms like Hill and Knowlton to let minority students have this opportunity. And along with this work opportunity, Pat, you teach the course I believe it's called Journalism and Minorities [right, that's right]? And also coordinate the publication of a very exciting magazine that the students produce themselves. Of the various experiences that the students have, Pat, in your opinion which is the most important?

Pat Patterson 00:06:57.640
Well I think, well I have a magazine background naturally [laughter] I like the thought of of the magazine that we produce. And it seems to me that that practical experience see the just the practical effort the everyday effort of putting out a product has something that's terribly rewarding it seems to me because at the end of the year after they've heard all the stories and the all the war stories about it what it takes to be a journalist, they can actually see at the end of that ten week period that they have produced something. Now maybe it means that they've stayed up nights writing their story and they get terribly frustrated when they had to design it and go to the printer and all that sort of thing. But it is that kind of experience which which helps them. And one of the things I'd like to mention about Dr. Barrow because I think his effort has been superb in getting publications in New York and organizations in New York to join in and support this program and as it's been his effort and yours that has kept this program alive. And one of the very key things as Fatima indicated before, getting a senior and exposing him or her to this kind of experience is not in my opinion as salient as getting a junior who has yet to face the real world. And then he begins to see what these what journalism is all about it with with all its warts and everything and as all its problems and frustrations. Then he or she has a more realistic picture of what the job market's all about and what his future or her future experience will be. And so I think that's very key in understanding why juniors are selected more than seniors.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:03.711
Now Fatima I believe this year there are some six or seven students in the program from all over the country. And I know you and Dr. Barrow are intimately involved in selecting these young people and I believe you said that there were at least thirty who could have easily come and done an extremely creditable job which raises an interesting question and that is do you feel, Fatima, that the opportunities for Blacks to get training in Hispanics and Asians and so on to get training in journalism have increased or decreased over the past few years. At one time there were tremendous number of internship programs. And as Pat suggested the NYU program, the AEJ program has really struggled to stay alive and largely due to the efforts of Lee Barrow and some very dedicated staff people we've been able to keep it moving. What's your opinion about that? Yeah, 300 who applied yet thirty or more who were able were you only able to serve seven. What's happened? What do you think's happened?

Fatima Shaik 00:10:08.140
Well it appears that many places are cutting back because the economics lately people are cutting back because they can't afford to hire students like they used to. Used to be that they could hire interns for the summer maybe take on four or five over a summer but now they're cutting down to one sometimes none. Looks like it's getting a little bit harder for people to break in. I think I think that places like a AEJ program and different programs will be the the programs that will keep something going, keep internships alive because they push employers to employ students that maybe they wouldn't hire and they wouldn't hire in the first place. They might say oh we don't need, you know, we don't need them this year but I think if they push by programs like AEJ and they have others that this can help students get jobs break into the field and then they'll be responsible journalists when they actually get into it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:08.520
And I believe one of your experiences was that a couple of these organizations were so impressed with the students they had in the past, that they contacted other organizations under their aegis and we have a journalist who's going to be working with Mechanics Illustrated and technical publications as well as with a couple of the well-known public relations firms right here in New York. Now Pat as you have worked with these young people, what do you think their main problems are in initially establishing articulation with the journalism field particularly the white journalism field but I know that most of them if you read these resumes they want to start a Black publication and they want to serve the Black community and they will limit their entire career to working around the Black or Hispanic community. Yet the world of work really isn't hat way.

Pat Patterson 00:11:59.610
Well it's an unrealistic aspiration. It's a very understandable one. The fact is that the communications media has really contracted in the sense that there are fewer outlets and those outlets are controlled by fewer and fewer people. And it is difficult for a person particularly an inexperienced person no matter how skill to start at the top and of course New York's City is the top. And it would be my suggestion and we tell them all the time that go and get your experience and and earn your or pay your dues in cities other than New York City's City and in smaller towns where you can do a multitude of things and hone your skills and sharpen your craft and then you'll be ready to go into New York City Atlanta Chicago L.A. wherever but. But these kids are not unlike any of the rest of us who started out who want to start at the top and of course the movie is tells us that's how it's done. So we really are somewhat reluctant about beginning at the bottom but that is unless you get an exceptional break that's where you'll have to start.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:30.690
Is there any particular difference in the relative emphasis on electronic and print media as you develop the program?

Pat Patterson 00:13:37.410
Oh yes we we. Well the program is principally print but we attempt to emphasize very sharply the tremendous impact that television has and radio but television in particular.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:54.061
And Fatima in working with these young people do you feel that they recognize the value of the experience they're getting?

Fatima Shaik 00:14:01.590
Oh I definitely think so as indicated by all the applications that we had. I think they definitely think the program's worth it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:08.540
We're talking with Pat Patterson and Fatima Shaik about the NYU AEJ Summer Journalism Program. The students stay at the university, right, [right] campus at Washington Square and I know you have a lot to do with that. Is any particular reason for having them at the university other than the fact NYU sponsors [laughter] the program?

Fatima Shaik 00:14:28.730
Well now I think it's a good location for them to be down around Washington Squares. It's easy for them to get to work. It's easy for them to get around and they have a class on a Tuesday nights, think. Besides that students are pretty much together when they staying together they can work with each other like Mr. Patterson said. We have a magazine that we produce and hopefully they can get together late at night and you know work on these stories for this.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:52.871
You know Pat each year you go through a struggle as to the name for the magazine it's been called "Still Here." It's been called "Genesis One." It's been called "Spectrum." How do you go about selecting the name? Is it something that the students actually work on themselves?

Pat Patterson 00:15:09.030
That's true. And it's a very delib-- deliberate process because most people seem to think that a naming a magazine is a rather simple process.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:19.770
And it's like naming the baby.

Pat Patterson 00:15:23.220
But the important point about naming a magazine it becomes their magazine and they go through this rather troubling time of selecting a name and they come up with some doozys. And at the end they've selected something which is not always democratic sometime. But at least it reflects the consensus of their thinking. But it is a very deliberate process and it's not a kind of whimsical thing that we just do each year. It's something they want.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:02.942
You're in a sense of the executive editor of this magazine and of course being extremely well-known and proficient editor yourself, the students gain a lot from working with you. And I know you introduced them and let them go into the press rooms and the assembly rooms of some of the great magazines like Black Enterprise. But as you work with these students, what skills do you stress with them? Fatima you may want to join in this too because you are professional journalists. What what are some of the skills you stress in working with these journalism students?

Pat Patterson 00:16:39.960
Well there there is a basic thing that I try to stress and that's just a basic sense of excellence, a qualitative kind of concern about their magazine. And I want that reflected in each article they write and hopefully it'll be reflected in the total magazine. I -- I try not to be extremely hard on them but frequently there is some resentment when an idea is rejected or a story is edited sharply as they believe it sharply. So I always think I'm being lenient [crosstalk] [laughter]. But one of the things we attempt to stress is quality and excellence. The other thing that I try to have them do and sometimes we're successful and sometimes we're not, is to have a kind of in in addition to being analytical to have a kind of detached view of what they're doing. As you know most of them want to solve the world's problems and particularly the problems of being Black or Hispanic and whereas that's extremely important and you really don't want to do to do anything to undermine that there is also something very humorous about life. Something very fun making about life. And I'd like to see their stories reflect that kind of detachment that sense of perspective and not to be as serious as some of them are. And so I try to have them write in a sophisticated style if they can. And generally I try to have them understand that writing is not a terribly, well it is a terribly serious business it doesn't always have to be serious, that's what I'm trying to say. Now Fatima, as a former reporter yourself, to what extent does this dispassionate detachment that Pat talks about interfere with the commitment that you and other minority reporters and journalists have to doing the job?

Fatima Shaik 00:19:05.701
Well sometimes I think it's it's very hard to be detached when you when you feel that there is something definitely wrong here, right. Oh there's definitely something going on that you would like to to report. I think it's hard to be detached. I think through the course perhaps the students can learn that one can say what one wants to say and point out something that's wrong or point out something that wants they want pointed out and do it in a very objective careful and accurate way.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:34.410
Now one of the things that Lynn Sharp who worked with the program for many years and is now with McGraw-Hill pointed out some years ago was that in the field of journalism what is reported and the way it is reported is to a large degree determined by the people who are making the decisions in the executive suite. Now how do you get that across to these students, Pat?

Pat Patterson 00:20:02.640
Well I think that that is the benefit that these young people get from talking to journalists who are there and go out and get a certain story only to have that story only frequently to have that story time to reflect just the editor's perception of what the reporter actually saw. And that is a constant battle and not only with young reporters but with veteran reporters. And it's very important therefore that a reporter go out and actually see and be analytical enough and objective enough to come back with a report that is as accurate as he can possibly get it. But if he permits his passion or his interest to color his view about whatever he's reporting, then he has really or she has really defeated their own purpose by coming back with a biased story and permitting an editor who might have his own biases to impose those on a story and for that reason we try to emphasize fact that get the story straight be objective as you possibly can. And then if you are right you just have to do battle with your editor.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:31.180
I was impressed with your earlier statement about the thing that you emphasized most is this commitment to excellence which is something that I believe in and we believe in at New York University at the Institute for American affairs and Fatima is smiling because she has recently joined our staff and she's learned what some of these steps of commitment to excellence mean. Now in working with these students what are some of the things that you're going to do to see to it that they commit themselves to excellence?

Pat Patterson 00:22:00.430
Well hopefully I think I think the fact the students have applied and they're, it's going to show that they're interested. They're going to be there. They're going to be interested the interest hopefully won't won't waive at all. I think that commitment to excellence is a, has a great deal to do with interests. I think of persons interested then they can like the creative juices can flow. I think creativity and accuracy, I think with those two working hand-in-hand with this interest that the excellence is just sort of guaranteed.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:33.051
What about simple things like being to work on time, being to work wide awake [laughter]. I mean these are relatively simple things and Pat is the one who's managed the newspaper and magazine you know very well what we are talking about in terms of developing these particular types of characteristics in our minority journalists.

Pat Patterson 00:22:53.350
Well fortunately for this program the level of students that we get, those have never been any problems for me as far as I'm concerned. And as you know we didn't do it last year but frequently we, in order to put this magazine out, we work on Saturdays. I know we used to bring them up to to Black Enterprise to do that this year and as we put out the magazine we will be doing some extra curricular activities. So I think that is a measure of of of students' concern about getting the story accurately and shaping their story and to a level where they would want their name on it. And I always emphasize that fact because I keep telling them listen this story is an extension of you. If it's a bad story well everybody can see it there in print. And I think they get that message. And frequently they're willing to work very hard to come up with a good product and that's what we try to do.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:07.880
And since the overall purpose of the program is to not only provide skills or help for minority journalism majors acquire skills and get insight into the workings of the media but also to develop more opportunities for minority journalists. What are some other things that can be done to increase opportunities for minorities in journalism?

Pat Patterson 00:24:31.030
Well I really think that that we are going to have to create and I mean minorities are going to have to create our own opportunities. I think that affirmative action will take us so far. But really the mass media's concern is not with minorities. Now I don't want to cite the reasons I think we all know them but I think that the problems of our cities, the problems of education, the problems of employment are concerns that minorities will have to articulate for themselves and do those things through their talents by getting, by communicating with one another. And I don't know what form that will take whether that's going to be weekly's or some kind of journal journals but those concerns must be articulated and articulated properly. I don't expect that the New York Times or The Daily News or NBC or CBS will articulate those concerns in the manner that they need to be done for minorities. I think that's a job that we must do ourself selves and we must find some way in which to do that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:50.001
Now Fatima what is your opinion about ways of increasing opportunities for minorities in journalism possibly building on some of the things that Pat had said.

Fatima Shaik 00:25:57.701
Well one of the things I think what I was thinking when he was talking is as far as students are concerned students that have an interest in communications should try to make as much as they can the opportunities for themselves. And this means being good and being needed. Like making yourself good enough that that the talent is there. The talent is there. The accuracy is there. And I think after that then just doing a lot of knocking on doors and checking around and you know enough to be able to tell someone that I am here, I have been here for quite some time and I'm good. You know you need, you need to hire me. I think students can do that themselves maybe in weekly publications or any place they want to go, you know just try around.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:38.981
Now at New York University film Institute of Afro-American Affairs, we've created a radio program "Mainstream" which runs on WNYU FM. We created a magazine "Black Creation" which is not now in publication but provides tremendous amount outlets for people interested in the arts, created two newspapers and a newsletter which gives students an opportunity to develop some of these skills. I do think Pat though that we need to put more pressure on these so-called mainstream publications and media outlets such as NBC. I think where it's true that affirmative action will take us so far but we do need to have even more effectiveness in that area.

Pat Patterson 00:27:20.680
I think I would agree with you wholeheartedly and I think that the pressure must be kept on. I just believe that there must be more representation in in majority media. At the same time I think that we need to explore those areas that will -- in which week ourselves can do some things.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:43.520
I think this is one of the things that comes out of working in a workshop consortium such as you and Lee Barrow and myself and Fatima have been doing. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" have been Pat Patterson, Editor-at-Large at "Black Enterprise" magazine and Fatima Shaik, coordinator of the NYU AEJ summer Journalism Program and we've been talking about opportunities for minorities in journalism and what we are doing in the AEJ program to fulfill these opportunities. Glad to have you with us as our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Pat Patterson 00:28:13.630
Thanks for having us.

Fatima Shaik 00:28:13.900
Thank you.

