Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.380
On August 13th, 1906, 167 Black soldiers of the 25th Infantry Division were dishonorably discharged without trial, by President Theodore Roosevelt for their alleged participation in the now infamous "Brownsville Raid." Hear Arthur French of the Negro Ensemble Company discussed the NEC's presentation of the play based on this incident on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:48.261
This is Soul of Reason, a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:15.080
With us this evening on Soul of Reason is Arthur French who plays Corporal Boyd Conyers in the Negro Ensemble Company's presentation of the play "The Brownsville Raid" which is written by Charles Fuller, and Arthur or should I call you Corporal Conyers, [laughter] we're glad to have you with us tonight.

Arthur French 00:01:34.100
It's a pleasure to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:36.740
As we said at the beginning of the program, this is an incident which occurred many many years ago some seventy one years ago now. That a lot of people both in the White and Black community don't know much about. But at the time created quite a furor in the country, particularly the Black community, because for the first time, soldiers, were cashiered, were discharged, were let out of the Army, losing all of their rights of being able to work as civil service workers, to get pensions etc.; because of an incident in Brownsville, Texas where some people shot up the town. It was alleged that they were Black soldiers. And then as the story the "Brownsville Raid" and the investigation goes on in the play. Eventually, these 167 men from companies B C and D of the 25th Infantry Division were ceremoniously discharged by Order of President Theodore Roosevelt. Which finally led, as the challenges continued, to the institution of what they call, "Courts of Inquiry" before anyone can be discharged from the Army now. So that in retrospect there's been some justice. And then finally, in 1972, the Congress, or in 1973, I believe it is the Congress the United States did finally pardon all of these men. Only problem is that all of the dead with one.

Arthur French 00:03:07.791
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:08.420
So based on this you and some 10 or 12 other members of the Negro Ensemble Company have presented a very very beautiful play which is now showing at the Theater Dili, on Christopher Street in the Village. Now, could you tell us why the NEC decided to present "The Brownsville Raid" on the occasion of its' 10th anniversary as a Black Repertory Company in New York City?

Arthur French 00:03:37.190
Well besides it being the 10th anniversary of NEC, it was also the 200th anniversary of American independence it was our Bicentennial. And so the thought was to do something historical and in keeping with the spirit of the Bicentennial. And this historical incident, even though very few people are aware of it, was something that we thought would fulfill both the Bicentennial and the purposes of the Negro Ensemble Company.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:07.250
And I know that Doug Ward, who plays Sergeant Mingo Sanders in the play, and is also the Artistic Director of NEC, does feel that very strongly that the plays of the company should reflect both the concerns of the Black community at the same time say something to the nation as a whole about what really is happening and has happened in our country. And Theodore Roosevelt was one of our heroes. The success at San Juan Hill, Cuba and the Rough Riders and these are some of the same soldiers that helped to make -- fought [crosstalk]-- with Colonel Theodore Roosevelt a great man; or at least elected him president. And then we find, in this play, he is negotiating behind the scenes with Booker T Washington, who then was the recognized Black leader at least by the White community. To hold off his decision to cashier these men of the Army. And the most cynical part of it is that he held it off until the day after he got elected [crosstalk].

Arthur French 00:05:14.750
Theodore Roosevelt requested Black troops and almost would not fight any of his battles at in Cuba and San Juan Hill, unless he got Black troops. He got into trouble strangely enough by inviting Booker T Washington to the White House. And got a lot of bad, what can I say, reverberations from it. People didn't like it. Southerners didn't like it. So by the time this incident happened, he was also in a strange position of now showing that he was not a nigger lover. That he was really not for the Black's as much as that incident seemed to show us because he had a Black man the White House was the first time that it happened. So he took the other tack and became extremely strong and revengeful against the Brownsville soldiers. And if the whole story is known, he went to all kinds of lengths to prove these men guilty, even after they were out. He had hired detectives, and people, to try to get or even to state, that they had confessed. The men who were already out. None of this really worked. But he went through great lengths to prove that this was a just decision because of course it was not.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:35.750
Now, to you get the historical facts straight. [cross talk]

Arthur French 00:06:38.210
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:39.471
It is true, I believe that in Brownsville, Texas, which is a very hot town, in southern Texas and also very prejudiced town at least at that time. They, Black troops who were with the 25th Infantry were at a Fort outside of town. And the economy of the town was a little shaken up by the fact that some Whites didn't want to shop where Blacks were, even though they were soldiers and they fought in the various wars and won medals. And somehow or another there was an incident. And in this incident, a person was killed and three or four others wounded. And there were some shells found that allegedly came from Springfield rifles, which is what the troops were using. Now from that point on, the play, as it develops, deals with the interaction between seven men in a barracks, which I guess, is a prototype of the whole unit. In terms of the accusations and counter accusations against each other. And also a series of investigators ranging from their own Captain, who was racially prejudiced. Right though a General who was also racially prejudiced, but in a different way. We'll talk about that in a moment. And eventually the men decided that they weren't going to cooperate and turn anybody in. Historically, does anyone really know whether in fact any of these men participated in this raid, or the shooting, or did they know and not want to tell?

Arthur French 00:08:12.712
All of the evidence that all of the research shows that no one knew anything to tell. In fact, many of the men when questioned said, if I knew I would tell. I wouldn't give up 20 years, as many of those men had. They were all older men. They were all men about 40, except for very few young men in it. They said if I knew I would tell, no one knew anything. There was never one name, in all the investigations that went on. There was not one name given or unearthed. There was never one witness who could identify anybody. No one really knows what happened. The evidence seems to point to the fact that the people did it themselves. Basically, not only because they were racially prejudiced, but because economically, they were suffering a hardship. There was a girl's school at that time, that was going to relocate from Utah into Brownsville, Texas. When they heard that the Black soldiers were now stationed there; of course, they decided to change their minds. They did not relocate. So they were suffering financially. And all of the evidence indicates, that these people were, there was never any witnesses, never any evidence, nothing to prove that they did it, except what some people claimed they saw.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:35.820
Well one of the suggestions, in the play, was that the bullets, which were found in a very close radius of about five feet. When as pointed out, when a gun like that ejected ejects far more than five feet. Tendencies just that they were planted there, and at least in the play was indicated that one of them was struck twice. Which suggests that there was some manipulation.

Arthur French 00:10:02.810
Well they were always, all of the evidence, including the bullets that were old shells, that had been brought from Nebraska that the man kept there. Was could have been taken by anyone, could have been left any place, with all of the accusations all of the investigations. There were three separate investigations, outside of the local one by the Captain. Nothing was ever unearth not one witness who could say he did it or I saw him.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:34.490
All right. Now that you have given the background we understand something about the "Brownsville Raid" and the situation. What about you as an actor? What type of things were you? You played the role of Corporal Boyd Conyers and you were a person who was initially one of the people who was accused and then you got back and forth with some of the other soldiers. How did you feel about this? Obviously, just from hearing you, talk about it, you are very committed to expressing to the public what this incident was all about. Now, as an actor, how did you get yourself into the part? What was your part? And what are some of the things you tried to project, as you dealt with this part?

Arthur French 00:11:18.340
Well the thing I tried to project is that in 19 0 6 and in those times, being in the Army was a very good thing for a Black man. It was one of the few jobs he had where he had a pension at the end of 30 years, where he had some measure of respect, where he wasn't subjected to as much racial tension and prejudice because he was a fighting man. It was a good job. And these men were proud to be in the Army. What we found out as we worked. For instance, the Boyd Conyers specifically had three children. He had a wife. He was a farmer and he was just really trying to do his job, the best way he knew how, and to support his family. He was a simple man, a man who was just working along. And then when he's caught up in this. In fact, he was the one who made the statement, that if he knew any thing, he would certainly tell it; because he had a lot to loose, his wife was sickly, and he was just working along.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:25.842
Some of these other people in the play. Mingo Sanders and Dorsey Willis and John Holliman etc., were they actually people or prototypes of soldiers who were in the unit? Or were they characterizations changed somewhat because of various legal problems? In other words, how closely does the presentation of the various soldiers relate to the way in which they were? Relate to facts?

Arthur French 00:12:57.820
Charles Fuller the author of the play, actually went to Brownsville, Texas. He went through the archives, there the public records, he went to the Congressional Records, and he tried to trace down, as far as he could. All of these men he spent that much time. So that the men represented, even though they were not in the same Company in real life, they were in different Companies. They are real people. And their representation is as close as you could possibly get. The incidents are real. Even their basic characters from what we can gather are the basic characters that we try to present in the play. So it is very accurate, as accurate as one can get after 70 years. In terms of who these men were, what type of men they were, what they did, what kind of soldiers they were. their ranks. All of those things are right on the money.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:58.120
All right in your presentation or your portrayal of Conyers. What scene comes to mind as the one that hit you the most that express most the feelings of Conyers?

Arthur French 00:14:12.430
Well, right at the very end of the play. Mingo Saunders, after we have been cashiered out, the man we know that we're going out of the Army. And there's a chance to maybe turn someone in, or to give a rumor to the General. Conyers is the man who says I can't, I can't do it, I've got to say something, I can't. I've got three children, I've got a wife, I've had 18 years in, I can't just let it all go. I have to do something, I have to tell something. And then of course that to me, is a tense moment for him a moment of decision. Does he go over and save himself by giving them Holman's name? Who we know has snuck into the barracks. And in the moments, when the other men say they're not going to do it. He finally decides that it is worth the sacrifice. He does not in fact tell. He doesn't give them the rumor. He decides and it's a difficult decision, to keep his mouth shut and to be cashiered out and to give up his life, per say, in order to have a unified front against the injustice.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:15:25.040
Okay, could you recreate this for our audience? And actually give those words that you said. And then, because I saw the play, maybe I can help to fill in some of the movements etc. Because this was a tense moment. The Sergeant Mingo Saunders had just been told by the General, that if they didn't tell, everybody was out. And he was planning to do it by I think it was 3:00 pm or 5:00 pm in the afternoon. And the men were in barracks, sitting waiting expectantly -- hopefully [cross talk]-- for their leader who was Mingo Sergeant Saunders. When you were sitting on one of the bunks [crosstalk] and what happened from there.

Arthur French 00:16:03.660
Well as we wait, hopefully, because I think we all hoped right up until the last minute that this could not possibly happen. The Sergeant tells us that it indeed has happened and that we are going to be cashiered. And he says nobody's going to talk, and that's it and we're all going to leave. And Conyers gets up and he says, I can't do it Sarge, I've got three, kids three of them. They depend on me, on me. I can't. And he sits down and Sgt. Saunders says each man has to do what he has to do and no one will look down on him. And at this point, the other men begin to say, I think we should stand together, And all of the men, in a period of time, stand up, to present a united front and Conyers still sits. And finally they ask him, and he takes a moment and he looks at Holman and who is the person that he might turn in. And he just stands up, and he goes along with.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:14.012
That is probably is the most dramatic moment of the play. Because it deals with something that black people have been concerned about all the time. Which is solidarity against the oppression that they have been facing. And to see those seven soldiers standing up there with their Sergeant, knowing that their life is just going right down the drain because they believe in each other and they believe in fighting this suppression and this injustice is really a beautiful thing.

Arthur French 00:17:43.290
And actually, it was 167 men who did that. All of them.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:47.971
Tonight on Soul Of Reason we are talking with Arthur French who is appearing in "The Brownsville Raid", which is being presented by the Negro Ensemble Company at the Theater Delee in Greenwich Village. Those interested in finding out more about this play should call WA4 8782 that's WA 4 8782. Now we dealt with what happened with the men in the unit. The thing that I found very interesting about the play was the way in which the White officers who were investigating it, went about it. The Captain, who allegedly was from the North, who just disdained in having any relations with Blacks even to the point that he would not go into the barracks.

Arthur French 00:18:37.411
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:38.581
And then a Major who apparently had some patrician or upper class background who didn't like the Captain. And reportedly understood the Coloreds. Who himself had the same type of bias which he talked about the 'conspiracy of silence of the Coloreds' where they wouldn't tell on each other. [laughter] And then finally the General, who was from South Carolina, the hometown of one of the soldiers. Who tried to be buddy buddy. He went into the barracks and he sat down and he patted them and he talked about the fathers and so on. And the final analysis, each one of them came to the same basic stance. Namely that they were judged guilty not because they were guilty but because they had to find somebody.

Arthur French 00:19:23.972
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:24.484
Because they were Black and it didn't really make any difference. In other words, the humanity of individual Blacks was lost and all of those people. And most strikingly Theodore Roosevelt. Matter of fact, I found some irony, if it caused some laughter in the audience. Where he says and Emmett Scott, who was Booker T Washington's emissary, said yes, Black people always stand behind the party of Lincoln [crosstalk] [laughs] behind the Republican Party and given the most recent election where 90 percent of the Blacks voted for the Democrats. It really was the height of irony. And it might well be that this play "The Brownsville Raid" might have been apocryphal in terms of what happens to politicians or any group people who take Black votes and Black support for granted. And of course that it has a lesson for us today in terms of our monolithic support even of the Democratic Party. Because the real point which I think that played dramatizes very strongly, is that Black people had to fight their own battles and that oppression will come in many forms and in any place in any time.

Arthur French 00:20:38.610
Well I think the politically poor Theodore Roosevelt got himself in a jam by inviting Booker T Washington to the White House. Now after he did that he was accused again of being a "nigger lover" and so forth. And so he really came down very hard on these the Brownsville people. There was a senator, Senator Foraker who protested the Black's case in the Senate and Theodore Roosevelt really worked on getting his whole that man's career just ruined.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:12.101
Yeah this was a scandal. Equivalent to almost the Watergate scandal [cross talk] sure. And of course that's one of the things that we as Blacks and others who believe in equity have to recognize is that the price of freedom is eternal vigilance.

Arthur French 00:21:26.281
Yes it is.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:27.451
That eternal fighting it goes on. And speaking of eternal vigilance the Negro Ensemble Company has been vigilant for 10 years. [laughter] They are Second Avenue and Eighth Street. And such people as, Michael Schultz and Lonnie Elder III, Esther Relay, and Clarice Taylor who's been on our show, Moses Gunn has been on our show, Rosanne Cash and yourself. On and on and on. Many of the outstanding Black actors, Black directors, Black lighting people, and so on. Have gained their training in the Negro Ensemble Company which really put together by Doug Ward and Bobby Hooks and some other people. Who have been very dedicated and concerned with developing what originally started out to be a Black Repertory Company. And as Doug has pointed out, it is difficult to keep any actors working 52 weeks a year. So basically, now you target. Certainly the "River Niger" came out of Negro Ensemble Company [crosstalk] a couple of years ago.

Arthur French 00:22:31.630
[crosstalk] "Cermonies of Dark Old Men"

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:32.981
Lonnie Elder, "Ceremonies Of Dark Old Men", "First Breeze of Summer" most recently which was on Broadway for a period of time. "Eden" and now the "The Brownsville Raid". What's your evaluation, you've been in the NEC for some years. And it's up and down like all parts of the theater. Depending a lot on public funding. Ford Foundation funding, New York State Council the Arts funding, National Endowment for the for the Arts funding. What is your personal evaluation of your participation in the NEC, Negro Ensemble Company and its effect on the world of theater particularly Black theater.

Arthur French 00:23:15.210
Well I was there from the beginning which is way back in 1967 and I think what the Negro Ensemble Company has tried to do in all that time is simply to present Black Theater whether it be American, African, West Indian historical, farsa the complete spectrum of Black writers and Black drama and Black experience. This has been the aim from the beginning and it is now. Whether the first play, which dealt with oppression in Portugal, which is "Song The Lusitania Bogie and Angola" into our present play which deals with oppression in the United States. I think this has been the overall total goal of the Negro Ensemble Company and of those of us who've been there and who go back and who would hope that on as far as theater is concerned to show that there are Black writers. They have been Black writers they're not just new there are plays that people have written for years that just got produced recently. "God is a Guess What " was written by a man 30 years ago. What was too revolutionary to be done then, so it was done 30 years now. So the effect on theater is only to do good theater and theater that shows that Black people did exist, in many areas. We are in history even though we don't read it. And we don't know about things like the "Brownsville Raid" we were there. We were cowboys. We did do things throughout the history, the 200 year history of America. And if we can dramatize it and make people aware of it, I think that's, that's all you can hope for.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:02.101
Repertory company has a tough job at best. You had Shakespeare Repertory companies we've had Eugene O'Neill Repertory companies. We've shown a KC Repertory companies generally around a theme or an artist. The NEC really is around the trials tribulations and struggles of Black people in general which raises the question as to how is it possible to keep the balance between political and philosophical insight and artistic creativity and excellence.

Arthur French 00:25:33.870
Well I think first of all you have to be artistry at its best. Of course raises our level of consciousness. It becomes more than just a diversion or a few hours to kill in the theater. I think NEC has tried because we don't have a star, to build it around a concept, of people working together of a unified group of people rather than having a quote one person being a star and the other people just filling in. So we hoped that people would come because it is interesting, because it is informative, because it is exciting theater, first before anything else.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:13.260
And I think it is exciting theater. Anyone who can go back and recall the "River Niger" for example or an extremely exciting theater. Things like the "First Breeze of Summer" which were more intra group dealing with a [cross-talk] Black family as a struggled. And so on, and now something it deals with one of the blots in our country's history. At the same time showing how Black people stood tall. What are some of things that Doug and the company and you folks plan to do in the future.

Arthur French 00:26:43.530
Well I know that "The Great MacDaddy" is gonna go on tour. Which is a play that was done before through I think the Virgin Islands and maybe overseas in Europe and so on. And Doug selects all the plays so he would have to tell you specifically but so far he is the winner. I mean he comes up with plays that are both meaningful and dramatic and interesting and I hope he will continue for another 10 years along with us.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:08.401
He plays the Sergeant in the play [laughter] and as we were talking before the show. Yeah that's a true to life [crosstalk]

Arthur French 00:27:15.780
Yes it is, he gives a lot of orders,[crosstalk] And he runs the NEC and he's done a brilliant job. Because NEC is still in existence and hopefully will be in existence for many years to come.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:27.510
Of course I'm sure like in any artistic venture there are points of disagreement. And one of the things that I have observed among Black actors in particular, is how even when they disagree with each other, they tend to support each other.

Arthur French 00:27:41.971
Yes well we have to, we have to.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:44.153
Both the emotionally and not and artistically.

Arthur French 00:27:47.550
I don't think that at NEC see we've really I it's hard to say this but we have never really had any arguments or any negative vibrations. We've always been there to do the job and that's it. We've been really kind of a happy family.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:02.791
One of the things that does highlight your work is the quality of your presentations your lighting, your staging, your sets and so on. And for Off Broadway theater that takes a lot.

Arthur French 00:28:12.601
And this is all done by Black people too. Which is great.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:15.991
Tonight on Soul of Reason we've been talking with Arthur French who plays Corporal Boyd Conyers in the play "The Brownsville Raid" based on the famous incident in 1906 in which 167 black soldiers were cashiered out of the Army. This is presented by the Negro Ensemble Company and you can call WA4 8 7 8 2 for further information. Glad to have you with us tonight on Soul of Reason, Arthur.

Arthur French 00:28:44.261
It was pleasure Oscar.

Radio Bumper End 00:28:46.230
You've been listening to Soul of Reason with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department. In cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

