Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:00:01.360
Don't 36 theater and dance organizations belong to the Black Theater Alliance. Hear how this organization helps to promote black theater in New York from Peter Bailey, the executive director of the Black Theater Alliance on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:37.361
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:01:03.950
With us tonight on soul of reason is Peter Bailey, who is associate director of the Black Theatre Alliance, and is well-known around theater circles in New York,  has written widely for "Ebony" and "Jet," and is doing a fantastic job pulling these 36 organizations together.  So maybe, Pete, you can begin by telling us just how the Black Theater Alliance works, because it is a very meaningful and useful organization in New York City.

Peter Bailey 00:01:29.250
Well, the Alliance is an umbrella -- it's a service-oriented umbrella organization of the 36 companies. Our job is to, to, to [stammering] look out for black theater and dance on a collective level. Each individual company has its own program. They do their own promotion. They do their own booking, they do, you know, they, they run their own program. Our job is to kind of look out for the interests of all the programs, and to do that we promote Black theater -- we promote all the companies. We put out a monthly bulletin which lists the activities of all the companies. Anything that comes out of the office is designed to promote, you know, the whole concept of Black theater and dance. And we run a, we have a technical training program, where we try to train people in technical aspects of theater, and then these people are available for use in all our companies as they begin to develop, you know, get their skills enough to be utilized. We are also, um, an information source on Black theater and dance. People call us from all over -- we get inquiries from Australia, from Africa. We get visitors who come by the office from abroad, you know, who have heard about the Black Theater Alliance, and we are the place where they can come, and then they can find out how to reach each one of the individual companies in one big stroke rather than, trying, you know, to go to find out, or going to go to each one separately. So we really are, um, I mean we are, we are the protectors. I really believe that's what we are. We are the protectors of the whole concept of Black theater and dance. You know it's a collective unit, you know, here in New York, in the City, right, mainly now in the City. But our aim is to go national. In fact, we have six members now outside of New York City. We have a member in Detroit, Michigan, a member in Seattle, Washington, a member in New Orleans, Louisiana, and members in Albany, New York, Buffalo, New York, and Newburgh, New York.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:03:09.763
And one of the great spillovers of the Great Society, the War on Poverty, is the development of so many Black cultural groups -- theater groups, drama groups, dance groups. And the Black Theater Alliance is doing an excellent job of providing this type of coordinating mechanism. I believe I heard that there are something like 150 or 200 community Black theater groups all over the country now. And probably, under your leadership, they should get into some type of umbrella, which enables them to communicate and to share resources and share information. I know recently I was doing some writing, and I needed the birthdate of one of our great Black playwrights, and who'd I call but Peter Bailey and the Black Theater Alliance, and he gave me the information so we could follow it through.

Peter Bailey 00:03:58.322
Right, well we are, we are expanding because there's now a Black Theater Alliance being formed in Chicago. See because the Alliance has three types of membership. It has general membership, which are the members in the New York area. It has affiliate memberships, which are the members outside of New York. And it has individual memberships, and these are people, for instance, like Viney Burrows, who does one-woman shows, or someone who does, you know, one-woman or one-man shows. Now, and you can join, a company can not only join as an individual, but let's say if they form a regional Black Theater Alliance in Chicago, then they can join this alliance as a regional grouping. So, so it's really set up, you know, and I hear that in Chicago and on the West Coast, they are forming alliances which are going to eventually align themselves with us, and we're gonna really begin to have a national hookup, you know, of Black theater and dance companies.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:04:46.732
From a philosophical point of view, I think that the development of these Black culture centers, is one of the most important things that has come out of the so-called Black revolution. And not only does it have cultural and social significance, but I think it has tremendous political significance. Could you comment on that?

Peter Bailey 00:05:05.650
You know, that is really true Roscoe.  And the reason that I think that people -- there's a tendency, especially in our community, to think of politics and economics, and ignore that there's a third member of that group, and that's culture.  And I think that culture, when you really see, if you really examine it closely, you will find that culture might be the most important, because culture is actually how people live.  You know, what they do in their daily lives, how they -- how they enjoy themselves, what they -- what they read, what they like to see, what -- you know the type of dancing they do, the type of books they read. And I think that, if a People are very oriented and very strong culturally, then, you can never destroy them.  You can never really -- you can, you can politically oppress them.  You can economically oppress them. But as long as they have some cultural -- maintain some kind of cultural identity, then there's that little spark there that can eventually grow to expand out and reach political and economic aims.  I think if a person has a proper, and oriented cultural identification, then politically and economically, he will know what to do. You will not have to go around saying, you know, you should support you know a black politicians who are doing their job but you should support you know black business people doing their job.  If they had the right cultural orientation they would just do this automatically.

Speaker 3 00:06:26.750
And of course many of the of the productions the plays the dances and music have cultural as well as political theme.  Right.  They really dig into what's happening in the black community between the younger and the older generation between the leaders and the general community.  And so much of what happens I see has a political significance it's almost like the role of black the black church which still has a very significant role in bringing black people together culturally and politically.  But the messages of the spirituals during a time of slavery steal away Wade in the water.  What have you.  Those were messages that had to do with messages of freedom.  And I think now as we look at black theater and black dance we get messages that have to do with the political integrity of the political challenges that face the black community.

Speaker 4 00:07:21.620
Well this is one of one of the aspects of black theater that is most important see black theater is not it's not in black theater and dance both.  They're not just art for art's sake.  They have a function.  You know they they are part of the total the total life of the community.  They have to be if they are not then they you know they're useless.  They have to provide insights that right vision they have to provide knowledge.  They have to provide information and they had to write entertainment.  You know I'd look upon entertainment as being one aspect of it.  My problem is is that when you look upon it the whole thing is just entertainment.  You know you just want to be entertained and that's it.  I think that that all of these things you should get out of participating in black cultural events and speaking of you know of the church I don't care what anyone say I mean I go to some of the big churches in Harlem and there is no Broadway musical a no Broadway production which can match the drama the flair the the the sheer pageantry of watching you know services in a black Baptist church in Harlem alone on this any Sunday but especially on a special Sunday like I go to a particular church on Mother's Day and the Mother's Day program.  They do to me is as great as any.  I tell people you know it's theater and I'm not saying this is a put that I'm saying this in any real sense of the word.  And the minister a minister who who works you know and who who's preaching that day to me gives performances that are better than anything you will see on the on on stage and occasionally black theaters try to catch that poorly for example right.

Speaker 3 00:08:55.860
I think in some parts of public brown sugar catch that.  But basically there is no place like home.  And for many black people black churches home.

Speaker 4 00:09:04.250
And if and if black theater and dance could ever capture you know the essence of what they do you know in the churches then in my job which is which is basically in charge of promotion and audience development would be a little bit easier.  You know because I think we would get more people out to see what we are doing.  I think right now are black theater of the 60s was really so one sided.  Roscoe you know and there was so much shout it was so shouting at people it was putting people down.  It was despair.  And as a result people stopped coming to the place.  We are now paying for that.  We are now trying to get people back out because it is a different thing now.  You know black theater now is not just a one sided limited view of the black black experience.  They're dealing with a total Black Expo.  You can see comedies you can see dramas you can see musicals you know you can.  They're dealing with they're dealing with with many many different type of things rather than just the very very limited view that many of them had in the you know in the late 60s.  And I'm hoping that people will become aware of this and not think that they're going to come to the theater and see themselves put down which is what happened really too often you know Ed. The president was very involved not as far as writing about black theater doing their time and who I must say was kind of encouraging and supporting this kind of theater that time.  You know I think I must you know I must share the blame along with everyone else involved in black theater but I really one of the things I really want people to understand now is that you know that was that at that time I still say that might have been necessary at that time.  You know maybe not.  But now you have and that is what.  But some of it was necessary.  But now we have expanded into something different and I think that that people now can come to see black theater and see many many different type of plays dealing with many different things on one weekend.  All right.  Talking about black theater and seeing many different kinds of things technology tell us about your summer festival that you're playing at the American Place Theater.  Yes we have an annual black theater of alliance festival this year.  It's going to be held at the American Place Theater which is at 111 West 46 Street in Midtown New York between 6th and 7th Avenues.  And in this festival we have all of our eligible members can participate.  This year there will probably be about 15 of our member groups participating.  They're going to be plays.  They're going to be dance concerts.  They're going to there's going to be a children's theater for matinees and the plays are going to be deal with many many different type of subjects the dance the dance concerts going to do it many many many different type of subjects and they're going to be from July 9th July 25th.  This is our fifth annual festival.  It has become something that you know that people look forward to and we are hoping to really.  We're going to be really going out to make people aware of what's going on and trying to get them into the festival.

Speaker 3 00:11:44.990
But how can members of the audience find out about this and how can they obtain tickets.

Speaker 4 00:11:49.540
Well anyone who wants to know about the festival can call the black theater alliance at 2 4 7 5 8 4 0 or they can write 162 at 162 West 56 street room three or three zip code 1 0 1 9.  And if you write there I'll call that we will be able to give you any information about tickets about what productions will be going on at what night well it will be a dance concert or a or a play whether it's a drama or comedy or music.  So we'll be able to give you any information you want in regards to the festival at that number that address.

Speaker 3 00:12:24.590
I know in past years the festival has been outstanding and bringing together the work of so many talented people with so many different points of view about the black experience I think is very significant I think you made a very significant point where you pointed up that there are a number of different views of the black experience and it really is incumbent upon those of us who live the black experience and want to understand it to look at these views.  That doesn't necessarily mean you have to agree with them but you certainly do have to look at them.

Speaker 4 00:12:52.150
The black theater and dance companies really need the support of the people.  They not only need them at the time of the festival but they also need their support in the communities where most of them you know up operate from.  And and I can assure you that you will get you know you will get something worthwhile.  This is not going to say that every single production is going to be you know award winning productions but whatever you whatever you come out you will see something worthwhile.  And we have people in their lives.  I don't think people are aware that Joseph Walker who wrote The River Niger.  His group is in the alliance Vernet Carol who did.  Don't bother me can't go.  I can't cope.  Her group is in the alliance.  Barbara and Tia who's a well known actress what OBE award winner and Odell Cole what would her group is in the alliance George face on the choreographer who did it won the Tony Award for The Wiz his company is in the alliance Fred Benjamin il your primary Ernie McClintock Roger Friedman who had to play Fat Tuesday which just run on a Hundred and Twenty fifth Street for the past seven months his group is in the alliance so I mean we have people you know who are recognized you know in their fields who award winners in that field you know and who have come to recognize this type of organization is important for their survival and when you come out to support them you are supporting people you know who who are really contributing and who who have made major contributions to black theater and dance.

Speaker 3 00:14:06.080
We're talking this evening with Peter Bailey who's associate director of the black theater alliance and we really look forward to an exciting summer with all of those things coming down the pike that you're dealing with.  Could you tell us a little bit more about the alliance how does the Alliance actually get its support.  What is the membership course.  How can people help to support it.  Because certainly it is performing a very worthwhile job.

Speaker 6 00:14:31.750
Well like most cultural institutions in this in this city and in this country and that includes the Metropolitan Museum and Lincoln Center everywhere we are dependent upon federal and state money we get a grant from the State Council on the arts.

Speaker 7 00:14:46.510
We get some money from the National Endowment on the arts.  We get money from foundations such as the Rockefeller Brothers Fund the Noble Foundation the Schubert Foundation The New York foundation and then we get individual donations but the bulk of our money comes from the state grants from the State Council on the arts of New York of New York state and all.  Which means you know that in this time of of of monetary crises and people cutting everything.  One of the first things that people thinking about cutting is that they regard the arts and the cultural institutions as being expendable expendable.  Now if you cut a large sum of money they say from lincoln center's budget it means that they will have to tighten up you know tighten up maybe a little bit they're going to survive if you do the same thing to us.  It could actually mean the difference between life and death of the organizations.  But I think we have been able to look to to convince the politicians and the people who run the you know the cultural establishment here in the city that what we are doing is necessary and crucial and important.  And that we should be continue to be funded.  But we.  We definitely would like to increase what we consider what we call our earned income which comes from people attending you know things that are done by put on by the alliance and by our member groups.  So we are the campaign now of really encouraging more people to come out.  We will accept donations and in return for donations.  We have things like we might offer you some you know a cop ticket to some of our fares but we will you know depending on you know how much a person donates.

Speaker 4 00:16:17.560
You know but we we always we we we need and we could use and we.  And we search for money from people who believe in the concept of black theater of death and who are interested and willing and able to support us.  And if they if they want to then they can send that money to the alliance at 162 with 50 sixty three all three zip code 1 0 1 9.  We would really welcome any type of support of this guy.  And as we talk about the alliance maybe you might mention the names of locations of some of the organizations.  For example I think Roger Freeman's new heritage Repertory Theatre on e one hundred twenty fifth Street is a member right.

Speaker 6 00:16:58.690
And I think the National Black Theater bar brand here which is also one hundred twenty fifth Street is a member of the Billie Holiday theater at eleven sixty eight 42nd Street in Brooklyn is a member of the F4 American studio theater at four fifteen West one hundred twenty seventh Street is a member of the new Federal Theatre for sixty six Grant Street is a member.  That's what he came to the king's theater and Woody is at Woody's at the big black theatrical producer.  He does some very good good work down there of the Billy.  You mentioned the Billie Holiday theater the Brownsville downtown theater.  We have the El yo ma dance company.  We have George face on Dance Company which is located on West 96 street.  We have the Fred Benjamin dance company.  The rod Rogers dance company which is on 13th street.  We have the sounds and motions which is headed by Diane MacIntyre which is located in the studio Museum in Harlem.  And by the way some of the dance companies also offer classes for those of you who want some exercise classes.  You can go and actually take exercise classes the same ones that the dancers take.  I have been taking one myself with with the sounds and Motion Dance Company and they're really beautiful because they're really they're designed to to train the body of dancers which means that they will you know they can work with anybody and they and I but I'm telling you you have to be ready cause they have no mercy no they have no mercy but we have companies you know we have like I said we have the Hudson Valley Freedom Theatre in Newburgh.  The black experience ensemble in Albany the black arts West and Seattle Washington the free Southern Theater in New Orleans.  And we have a Brownsville lab theater in Brooklyn which is a small theater group in Brooklyn.

Speaker 1 00:18:41.830
The Alonzo players out of Brooklyn the East River players would come out of East Harlem ballet Hispanic all you have to pay a lot of and every one of the really good and developing black theater groups in this area.

Speaker 3 00:18:54.370
Now let's talk about black theater itself.  What do you think have been the most successful black plays this particular season.  Black plays black musical White one of the things that sometimes disturbs me although I love a good musical is the fact that it looks as though our serious players are not surviving as much and our musicals are doing very well.  The two biggest hits of course the wiz and bubbling brown sugar both of which are extremely well done but basically they are not political statements as such is a theme of a political statement and bubbling around sugar.  What are some of the other really successful black players.  Well our position at the alliance is that if you want to see anything anything in black theater other than the big musical you've got to check out our members.  Now if you want to actually what plays I've seen this year that I really liked the best.  Well the first one is by a group that's not in the lives of which I'm currently really try to work on and that's the Negro Ensemble Company.  And I have a play called Eden which is you know which is a fantastic play you know which to me was probably I would say the best play that I remember seeing in the last few months then that it would be King's theater.  So a play called Section D which is run by a young playwright who graduated I mean why you I think last year year before last about a several young dudes and trying to find out what it means to be a man whether it's just you know the brutality the verbal brutality the posturing you know is this all that it isn't being a man it's it's a beautifully done play you have Roger Freeman's comedy Fat Tuesday which is like I said it's been raining in Harlem for seven months and which is based in a brothel in New Orleans in the nineteen 1920s and it's funny right.

Speaker 1 00:20:36.820
Yeah.  One of the funniest writers around right say that.

Speaker 6 00:20:40.490
And then you have Ernie McClintock doing the hands on the gate which is a musical look at black history through music poetry and dance which is beautifully done was won by Roscoe Lee Browne and then on Broadway in 1948 and Ernie them have done a revival of it that is really really excellent.  And for someone who never saw the Broadway show it's really worth checking out.  You have things that the National Black Theater soul journey into truth which is a kind of book which they have really gone and tried to take on the church experience and add it to the to the more formal theatrical experience come up with something new.  And it's the type of thing that gives you a very very warm feeling you go into it and experience it.  You have Joseph Walker who wrote The River Niger has a new play out called The Lion is a soul brother which is again dealing with the subject of as Joe said as to whether you need all that verbal brutalizing and everything in order to be a man or can you be gentle and loving you know and still be a man.  That's the theme of his play over the Billie Holiday theater currently.  Charles go down who won the Pulitzer Prize a few years ago for no place to be somebody has a new play called the last chord which he says deals with some young men in the 1940s and how they had to use the cross you know in a different way in order to survive.  Very mysterious.  So you have to go and see it you know to find out exactly what he is talking about.  But these are just some of the productions that are being done out there right now by you know by alliance members and by other black theater groups.  We basically say like I said earlier I mean that if you really want to see anything other than the big musicals we have nothing against the big musicals but that is just that's just one aspect of black theater.  But if you want to see drama if you want to see comedy if you want to be see things dealt with that you're just not going to see on Broadway then you really have to check out productions done by our member companies and of course is one reason why black theater is such a thing stimulating part of the total theater picture.

Speaker 3 00:22:37.250
Many of the good ideas that are being dealt with in theater at large and on television and in films emerge from black theater.  And that's one of the reasons why it's important for those of us who can and I think all of us can because the prices aren't really very high.  They're very easy to get out there and to support black theater.  Now what about black dance.  We do know about Alvin Ailey is probably the most popular dance company here in New York maybe in the country right now.  We know about the Arthur Mitchell's Harlem Ballet Theatre but what about some of the other groups that we don't hear about quite as much groups that I would recommend highly.

Speaker 6 00:23:20.210
Fred Benjamin Dance Company.  Diane Macintyre is sound in motion.

Speaker 1 00:23:24.770
Ella you'll know why.  Tell us where some of these places are.  Because I think somebody might want to check them out.  Well this sounds in motion a homebase if the studio Museum in Harlem which is twenty thirty three Fourth and Fifth Avenue at 120 50 and Fifth Avenue I must be very frank.  I don't know the exact addresses many other move around.  I know they've rivals and studios and I do know that if you call me at the alliance you know that I'll be able to give you a few if you call me and give me your address and request a monthly bulletin you will get them the monthly bulletin which lists the activities of each one of our members for that particular month the June monthly bulletin will be available and we'll be out in the next this week.  So anybody who wants to know you know all the details you know can really call me at the Alliance and I'll be able to give it to them.  And by the way I dance companies if you want to see an interpretation of Aretha Franklin's Amazing Grace album.  Check out George face someone doing it.  You want to see people dance interpretive dances to Stevie Wonder to Otis Redding to James Brown to cool and the gay you know to war.  I mean black dance companies are taking you know black popular music and interpreting and doing modern dance to it and it is really beautiful to watch and see a tie up visit to see George face Dance Company do dance to Otis Redding sitting on top of sitting on top of the world sit on the dock at the back of the bay and try a little tenderness you know and they do a whole thing with well of interpretation of a Beatles album Amazing Grace.

Speaker 3 00:24:53.270
That's very interesting because I imagine there are a number of groups social groups that have affairs and fundraisers they would like to integrate these dance companies into their activities.

Speaker 6 00:25:03.950
And I would imagine that dance comes would be very amenable would be very glad that we have a touring brochure that we have put out which lists each member of each to each member of the alliance and had a biographical sketch in each member and they are available to be booked you know for tools for things well here in New York and for tours all around the country and also beginning on July the 5th or the Atlanta itself is going to be sponsoring a black theater at last monthly happening the first Monday of every month at Billy's place which used to be Lamar tunics and 50 70 right off Fifth Avenue and every Monday night we go to favorite dance to the disco.  But you're also going to get maybe a scene from one of our plays a dance number by one of one of our dance companies.  And also we have people on last Hussein who seeing the old shout blues and you'll be able to hear one of them each Monday night and that's beginning the first will be July 5th.  And Harry Belafonte has agreed to emcee the first one in July the 5th.  What is the price for that.  It's gonna be a five dollars admission and it's got called the BTK monthly happening and I'll be the first Monday of every Monday.  Beginning with July 5th they'll be the first Monday of every month thereafter.  And for people who might have an idea let's say of bringing bringing a dance company or a theater company to one of their fairs they could come and check that out and see how we gonna do it.  And then they will get an idea as to how it can be done because like for instance Roger might be going to have Roger I think opening it and he's going to come down and do a scene you know from from Fat Tuesday and then with the idea that you will see that and then you will go to the theater or wherever it feels to see the rest of it you know.  And then we might have we'll have one of the dance companies maybe do you know of 15 to 20 minute dance number and then we'll have a blue thing or he'll give you some some shout and lose the radio Williams and Dalloway.

Speaker 1 00:26:47.390
You really couldn't convince me.  And I think you convinced the audience who talked about Peter Bailey the salesman now let's talk about Peter better the critic one of the things that I've observed as we've had this explosion of black theater is that we haven't had a concomitant development of black critics.

Speaker 3 00:27:03.820
You wrote forget an avenue you left because you really committed to black theater and you went to work with the black theater alliance and then not many Peter Bailey is around now.  What's being done.  What can be done to develop more black critics.  What we really need a Rothko is some kind of.

Speaker 6 00:27:22.780
Of of acknowledgment or support from the black press the black press simply is not yet aware because they do not put culture on the same level as put economics and politics.  There is no steady outlet.  They are black.  Black people out here.  Black writers who are competent to write about theater and dance on a continuous basis as critics.  But there isn't.  They have no outlets.  There is no outlet.

Speaker 1 00:27:45.870
There is no no magazine a newspaper which you give it to black creation art magazine.

Speaker 6 00:27:50.750
Go on I have been trying to get black newspapers 25 and let me do a theater column from New York you where I would review Black plays in New York that are coming out.  There will be not only in New York.  There will be traveling around the country but we've not been able to get that we need that type of of of thing support from the black press.

Speaker 1 00:28:06.270
Oh yeah well that's the kind of thing we need to work on.  And that's reason why it's important that people like Peter Bailey get a chance to talk about things like this on soul of reason.  Our guest on nights only reason has been Peter Bailey who is associate director of the Black Theatre alliance.  We've been talking about happenings in New York and if anyone is concerned about black theater in New York they should call 2 4 7 5 8 4 0.  That's a black theater alliance.  And thanks again to Peter Bailey for being our guest on tonight soul of reason.

