Speaker 1 00:00:01.590
Black is not a color. It's an experience says Professor Scott Kennedy of Brooklyn College of the City University of New York. Here Professor Kennedy discuss his new book In Search of African theater on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:34.900
This is Soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 3 00:01:01.840
With us tonight on soul of reason is Professor Scott Kennedy Professor of Speech and Drama at Brooklyn College. Professor Kennedy has recently written a book in search of African theater which describes his exploration of African theater in Africa for the past few years. Scott possibly you could tell us what you were trying to do in this book and sense what motivated you to write the book.

Speaker 4 00:01:26.890
Roscoe the Well I must say first to the audience. I go I go. Now you're supposed to say I may if I had said hello you know what I was talking about in West Africa in Ghana the Ashanti nation the shanty people speak the language tree.

Speaker 5 00:01:46.300
And our goal is similar to Hello.

Speaker 6 00:01:48.910
So I say to Roscoe I go I go. And you say I may I may. Now we talk talking three. Now we get back to our back to the question I was trying to do just that to find out something about African people.

Speaker 4 00:02:05.250
And I went to the continent to the roots to find out. And I lived on the continent and I immersed myself in the lives of the people. And I was searching. So the book is called in search of African theater.

Speaker 1 00:02:19.180
Were you searching for African theater or are you searching for African roots.

Speaker 7 00:02:22.810
I was searching for African theater and if I can look in order to find African theater I must find out something about African roots.

Speaker 8 00:02:31.780
I was also searching for theater because to me Roscoe theater is a universal expression of man in the end. And if you are a man then you are involved somewhere in the theater. Now most of the theater that I studied Roscoe was European theater. There is European theater in America a European American theater coming out of the European family of man. Now some people are beginning to understand a little bit about Asian theater and have accepted it and embraced kabuki.

Speaker 5 00:03:07.540
Chinese Indian but many people black and white alike never thought of African theater.

Speaker 8 00:03:16.840
Now African theater is the theater of the family of African man and I know that to define is really to limit and to conceptualize is to expand.

Speaker 7 00:03:29.410
So I like to conceptualize African theater and that's again the book is a search. This is the first book ever written on African theater and I asked to the audience why with all the African people in the world and the black people in this country why is this the first book people are seeing what is black theater.

Speaker 5 00:03:50.020
What is African theater. I have I'm forced to give it the definition I give one black theater is the expression and the communication of the black experience set forth in a dramatic theatrical manner.

Speaker 4 00:04:05.210
Now they own that definition for a while.

Speaker 3 00:04:09.910
When you say lay on it you mean try to conceptualize what it means. Now on soul a reason we have a lot of people from black theater who come and talk about their plays their acting and so on. And whereas you're a professor and you give an academic don't know what they say is that black theater is just an expression of black life.

Speaker 7 00:04:32.770
Well what did I say. Well let's get something clear the record clear. I'm a professional actor director writer composer I am also with academia. I went to Africa to bridge the gap between the academic and the professional. So I have walked in limbo on two lines in the line of the artistic in the line of the so-called academic whatever that is.

Speaker 8 00:04:55.870
And now get back to your question I say that this is a search and I am really talking about the universality of man and I am talking about theater as it expresses itself from a group of people.

Speaker 7 00:05:09.250
These are people who are called black people.

Speaker 9 00:05:11.620
So there is an affinity between that theater of Africa and that theater of black America. In fact in time Roscoe we will be talking about black theaters in the contemporary black world. Wherever there are black people they are expressing themselves out of their lifestyles out of the black experience and black is not in color. It's an experience because I recently spent a year down in Australia introducing black theatre and African theatre to that continent. There are black people down there expressing themselves and so that is black theatre too. So a part of the idea of the book is to open the door on this kind of thing that we're talking about now. We need to explore who we are where we are and what we must do to be ourselves.

Speaker 10 00:06:07.960
In a sense though that's the classical role of theatre anywhere in the world. Isn't the theatre one of the main ways in which any society expresses itself its concerns its feelings its passions its heritage. That's why I wrote the book on African theatre because our heritage has not really been widely expressed. It's been expressed in our culture but in terms of it being written about as you suggest being a standard being analyzed it hasn't been analysed and projected as much because one of the things that happens though when you get into analysis sometimes you are more or less kill some of the spontaneity and some of the excitement.

Speaker 3 00:06:47.800
And that's one of the problems that those of us who call ourselves critics get into are possibly you could attack this from a standpoint of well how does African theatre through its music its movements its language its humour its art forms express the concerns of and the life of African peoples.

Speaker 5 00:07:14.320
Well African theatre expresses its concerns similar to any other kind of theatre except that it comes more from the traditional lifestyles of these people who are called Africans and since theatre started in Africa. I say that again theatre started in Africa. It came out of the rituals the incantations and the festivals and the ceremonies of man. It came out of man's dance theatre or man storytelling theatre. That was the first kind of theatre. Years and years and years ago came out the connection with lifestyles and it is still connected with those lifestyles of the African people. It is more of a kind of a total creation and I call it a creation celebration. It's a celebration of life. It's how they celebrate their lives whether that be the death scene whether it be the birth scene whether it be the in-between scene and so there are more traditional connections there. We have them here our black theatre is a very rich black theatre going back of course and holding on to the Black Heritage or the heritage of these people who were first African who were who were then called slaves who are now called black. It is more connected. The Black Theatre in this country is more connected to the African people and the African theatre than it is to the European people than the European theatre. Just as we talk about black music and all over the world they're saying that some black music. And I say What are you talking about. Isn't it music. They say yes it's music but it's black music. And so when we talk about theatre we know that this is theatre coming out of the expression of these people who are called black.

Speaker 4 00:09:14.710
Who were originally called Africans who may someday be called Americans but at this point are not called Americans. I make that point in my book that the only time I was ever called An American Roscoe was when I left this country the very first time was when I was in Mexico and the person said these medics I know you're an American. Have you ever been called an American in this land of your birth.

Speaker 1 00:09:41.050
When they call you that a military service has about there all the time.

Speaker 7 00:09:45.190
I mean now seriously I mean have you ever been called an American. I don't mean on paper. See I've been called and I'm just making this a point for the audience.

Speaker 3 00:09:55.180
So it depends on your circle. So have I I have but that leads to a lot of argumentation. On occasion you know there's some people who make a big big issue of you know all blacks Afro Americans all the Americans or what have you and when you get into some circles you run into that but I think your point is well taken that basically in 1974 at least the majority of people in our country have not really recognized the American ness of blacks and many blacks themselves are not even anxious to be recognized in such a fashion. But let me take another tack which in a sense relates to what we're just talking about and that is the political infusions of theater. Some of the playwright black playwrights and actors whom we've had on the show have pointed up not necessarily all of them. That black theater is political. But that is the main theme that should reflect through black theater and in some way the theater should be attempting to teach or preach or give some education which provides the energy for black people to take action in the political frame to change their conditions of oppression. To what extent is that a major theme in African theater today.

Speaker 11 00:11:13.260
Well this I think would take me longer. Some of the things that you said I'd have to kind of debate with you I think a writer writes from his own experiences and if we are looking I don't want to evade your question and I don't intend to but I do want to hew to the line.

Speaker 8 00:11:32.320
The fact that black theater dash African theater African theater black at black theater. I'm speaking of them as being in the same family. Like this one man becomes one boy becomes a lawyer another becomes a doctor. Another becomes a ditch digger. They are still in the same family so I am not making this dichotomy between black theater in this country and African theater. So I make that point very clear. I'm saying they all come out of the family of African theater.

Speaker 3 00:12:04.380
Now once I have said that and then I look at what you are seeing the I was not necessarily expressing my own opinion I was expressing the opinion that had been reflected by some black playwrights and actors on the show.

Speaker 7 00:12:15.060
All I can say is I'm talking about through my book and it is the book right now. The only book and let somebody else write some other books on it and express it and let's discuss it from that point of view. I would say that the writer himself in this particular country who is called Black has to be social. How can he be any other way if we go back to the play mulatto written by Langston Hughes many many years ago it was taking a look at black people in this country and where they were. We go back to the Asian corner or we go let us say that to blues Mr. Charlie Bolden was taking a look at the conditions in this country. So I don't know that I have to talk about being militant. I don't know that I have to talk about being political I am because I live because I am one who is called black. I am of that nature. There's no other way that I can be any other way. I don't think that you can look at black theater through one window black theater African theater or black theaters in the contemporary black world must be viewed from a three way window first from a cultural traditional point of view.

Speaker 5 00:13:34.440
That's the way it was at the beginning. Out of Africa we still have it here. Out of this country too because of our rich music. Black music black dance and so forth. The second perspective would be from a social frame of reference. Now we have most of it in this country from a social frame of reference and I think that's what the actors and directors who are called black were talking about on this show they were talking about the need to express themselves out of their own society.

Speaker 12 00:14:09.030
Well let's let the frame of reference is the dramatic theatrical frame. Yes.

Speaker 10 00:14:14.060
No one knows what to say. I think the point was a little different and when I project I'm not projecting at all of the black playwrights or actors feel this way but I believe the point that was intended was that through black theater certain political courses of action should be projected. A goodly number of these are projected in the socialist frame criticizing the capitalist system suggesting that the you drama this the working together of a society is a way in which we should deal with this. Also focusing very specifically on the nature and conditions of the oppression and suggestion of possible course is to deal with this. This has to do with just intellectual rejection all the way to physical rejection of the oppression. And that's one type of theme at some of the playwrights have talked about another theme which seems to be at least according to some of our more recent guest being reflected in this particular part of the 70s is looking at the interpersonal relations between blacks particularly in families and plays like the sirens or plays like my sister my sister to mentioned to the more recent plays recognizing as you put so ably and clearly that whenever you write about the black experience you're writing about the situations that impinge on us. But I was really dealing with the question which I know Soviet theater has dealt with I know Cuban theater has dealt with I know Chinese theater is dealt with and that is to what extent should there be explicit political messages are there explicit political messages in some of the forms of African theater Rosco let me address myself to that.

Speaker 13 00:16:05.700
I think again the writer must write from his own experiences his own expertise his own direction his own inclination. I cannot tell a man who is a musician to write as an opera when he wants to write musical comedy or when he best does that.

Speaker 12 00:16:23.400
I would certainly agree too though with those playwrights and directors who would like to see more political theater but all black theater in a way is political because it is examining this black experience in this oppressive society and in a sense black theater evolved in this country because of the oppressive nature of the man from the very inception when these people who were called Africans were brought to this land and the law made it illegal for that slave to learn how to read or write. These people gave us one of the most oppressive situations the world has ever known. And so these people who were called European people are now called white made it possible for the socio militant et cetera et cetera to come through in black theater. But remembering that they were slaves at that time and they had to deal with their telegraph songs they could sing but they couldn't put on other things. Then we went through that period and the World War One period and the black and Renaissance and World War Two period and now into the period of blackness again man who is called Black is expressing himself in yes many different ways and some of those ways are and should be political should be very militant but they have to come out of the genre and the expertise of the person who is doing the writing. Some people deal with music so let them deal with the music. But by and large it runs the gamut of the whole black experience. I for one don't know that one can sit down and say I'm going to be that political. I think one must sit down and examine the situation. I for one would want to see more social more historical plays. We don't have historical plays yet. I would like to see Andre. Christoph M. Marshall is working on as a movie I'd like to see that as a movie and not continue to have rip off movies and anybody listening to me knows what I mean by rebel movies. We don't we haven't yet had the historical movies. There are so many characters running across the stage that could be there. George Moses Horton is a good example. He was a slave down in Chapel Hill and he wrote poetry for these students who were white students back in those days. And he made enough money to finally write a book on liberty and slavery I think was published in 1826 when he was a slave. That's a rich figure for a play would show the oppressive nature of the people back in those days coming on down the line there's so many of these historical figures they could be political that could be very easily politicized. So we're in the same corner.

Speaker 1 00:19:34.800
I agree with all of those people wherever they were wherever they were. Tonight we're talking with Professor Scott Kennedy of Brooklyn College the author of the new book In Search of African theater.

Speaker 3 00:19:46.110
And speaking of African theater we've been talking about the various forms that it takes. I know that you spent a good deal of time in Ghana which is in West Africa. I was wondering if you had an opportunity to do much traveling and observation of East African theater or even South African theater.

Speaker 10 00:20:02.750
South West African theater and to what extent are there certain generic patterns that exist in these various African theaters.

Speaker 12 00:20:15.270
Well if I answer several questions there are. Yeah I think what one is. Yes I was based in Africa in Ghana West Africa. That was my base. But I did get a chance to get all over West East and North Africa. And fortunately during the period of say from 66 to maybe around seventy one because my wife was a professional activist she and I were participants at the Dakar festival in 66 and that's the first time I saw African theater from all over that rich continent back to back the west east north and the north and all.

Speaker 13 00:20:54.350
We stayed in Africa. We worked in Africa. I went out to East Africa and looked at the Sudanese theater the theater fancy area from Kenya and Tanzania from Ethiopia. What have you.

Speaker 14 00:21:10.130
First I would say that maybe one should study one aspect of one country and find out what Africa is all about from one's perspective one could not look at all those different languages one doesn't have enough time to learn and many different languages just like one can go to one European country and know all of all all of Europe.

Speaker 13 00:21:32.030
No but I'd say even more so in Africa because it made no one about a thousand languages there and it's such a diversified continent yet from let's say Ghana to Ethiopia. There is a similarity and I point this out in the book. There is a similarity in the dances. There's a similarity in the theatre the drama the music. There's a similarity in these there's a similarity in East Africa. At this moment in time I would submit that West Africa is perhaps further ahead with its dramas dramas being on the page. Theatre being on the stage now in this book I'm really talking about theatre and how you make theatre. So there are differences and yet there are great similarities. A play petrels at the hour which is about the patron saint petrels in Ethiopia is a play that anyone here would understand. I'd like to have a premiere that play over here. It's. It was written in Amharic but Sir Guy gave him medicine. The playwright put it in English and I have the right to do that in English one from Ghana would understand that play because it comes out of an African traditional approach to life one from Ethiopia would understand the dagger of liberation of which I speak in this book The were people in Ghana who were trying to live be liberated from an enslaved position there in Ghana. So there are similarities much perhaps more rich drama dramas coming out of West Africa at this point. What is the Yanco being one of the most prolific playwrights I think around today anywhere in the world. Dura Oladipo who is there with his Europa Theatre in Nigeria John Pepper Clark. These are some of the playwrights you can get over here out of Ghana. You have a southern man you have Sarkar Kwe you have people like that had an East Africa. You have jeans and Ngugi. You have Robert Sara magma out of the Kenya and on down the line now to directly answer your question. The differences lie essentially in the approach in the to the lifestyle in that particular continent. I mean in that particular country the plays in East Africa are the playwrights are not as prolific at this point as they are in West Africa. The theatre in East Africa is the second to theatre in West Africa the North African theatre was another thing we were invited and participated as actor directors in at the Pan African festival cultural festival in Algiers in 1969.

Speaker 12 00:24:34.940
There we saw again back to back theatres from all over Africa. And so we got a sampling of what was happening in the east and north and west Africa.

Speaker 14 00:24:46.220
I know nothing about South Africa. I haven't been there haven't been invited like to see what's going on over there and that part died part of the world. I have met South African writers like these in the book again.

Speaker 15 00:25:06.710
Alex Guma it's one of them and some of the others and they do some very interesting things in the music particularly in the music the plays have not come out yet maybe because it's hard to get them out.

Speaker 3 00:25:21.710
And then again I would think of all places South Africa would have a high intensity of political play. Yes that would be one reason why they wouldn't be played in South Africa.

Speaker 15 00:25:31.460
Right right. I in this book let me just a minute say that the book is written like three books and one almost in one part of the book is impressions impressions for those people who are not in academia. For those people who were out in the street like I came out of the streets and maybe in academia. But the point is they can read it and dig it and understand it. The second part of the book is written in a documented way so called academic and yet I am an active academic and I don't really know what that is.

Speaker 6 00:26:07.340
The third part comes out of a poetic you know it is you don't agree with it.

Speaker 16 00:26:12.100
Well I don't know what a scholar is I was a senior research scholar in and in Africa and was a Fulbright scholar in Australia and I think I call myself a participant observer and that's a legitimate research thing today. So let's go on the scene. Look at the scene find out what they're doing and then go from there. What I wanted to do in the book was to open the door to the universality of man and particularly M.A. in man who is called Black and his richness his culture is beginning there from Africa and coming on over here to this black American scene. I I'm working on that now.

Speaker 10 00:26:55.220
The black American scene and the relationships between that theater are there many opportunities to see African theater here in New York. I know occasionally some of the theater troupes do come but is there any more or less regular presentation of African theater or is that one of the things you hope to do in the future.

Speaker 15 00:27:15.020
Well that's one of the things we hope to do it takes money and you know it takes money to get them here. Sarkar Kwe who wrote to the lost fishermen which is considered the first opera only is not an opera because that's a Western term. He's been trying to get his play over here but it takes money and Africa is poor the continent is very poor they need their money first for a living.

Speaker 1 00:27:39.530
Okay. Tonight on soul of reason we've had as our guest Professor Scott Kennedy of Brooklyn College and we've been discussing African theater as reflected in his new book In Search of African theater by Charles Scribner and Sons.

Speaker 10 00:27:54.740
Glad to have you with us tonight as our guest on sole reason and I hope we'll be seeing a lot more African theater in New York. Thank you very much man Darcy Madame de Medici BPP that means thank you. Thank you very much Roscoe. I see what I see with I see it.

Speaker 17 00:28:08.000
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Art for one hour week on affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:22.520
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

