Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:01.321
July 4, 1976, marked the two-hundredth anniversary of the founding of the United States. The bicentennial celebration has helped focus attention on the contributions and problems of black Americans. Here, Drx. Ralph Carter of Livingston College Rutgers University discusses blacks and the bicentennial on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:41.701
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:08.701
With me this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Dr. Ralph Carter, who is the assistant professor of history at Livingston College Rutgers University and was most recently seen as co-host with me on a television program on WNBC TV entitled "Bicentennial: A Black Perspective." And here we are again Ralph, talking about blacks and the bicentennial. Glad to have you with us tonight, Ralph.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:01:30.511
I'm very happy to be here.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:32.131
Well now that we have given your credentials about knowing all about blacks and the bicentennial, suppose you tell our audience your opinion about what you think the bicentennial has done to highlight the contribution of blacks in the American Revolution and in American history.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:01:50.940
I do not think that they've done really enough. Not nearly enough to highlight the contributions of blacks or the type of society that we had at the time the American Revolution began. They have some special issues. Dr. Sidney Catlin at University of Massachusetts had a very large...book put out with pictures and things like that that were produced during the Revolutionary times that highlighted some of the contributions of blacks. There have been by blacks themselves...the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and literature have put out booklets and pamphlets showing historic sites throughout the country. Others like Ebony--Ebony Magazine--Johnson Publication has done a whole special series of thing. Their senior editor, the great lay historian Lerone Bennett, wrote an article--a controversial article--that caused a number of professionals and lay people to take notice of not only contributions of blacks, but whether blacks should even participate. And this caused a lot of debate and things like that which was very productive for black participation. But the thing is, the the great media that we have in the United States--television--has not done nearly enough. None of the major stations have carried any of the...taken the responsibility of showing the actual roles that blacks have played in the formation of the nation.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:27.030
Probably the most comprehensive thing was the ten-program series that you and I did on bicentennial black perspective, which appeared on five stations throughout the nation, NBC stations...but you're right, there's been no major program during the entire bicentennial related to blacks. There have been one program on Sojourner Truth and another program on Frederick Douglass which were spotted around the country, but none that really dealt with the magnificent contribution of blacks during the revolution. One thing that we've done at New York University in cooperation with the New York City Bicentennial Corporation is the development of a book which will be available. It's entitled "Ebony Patriots." And it deals with the names and dates in which blacks fought and the battles surrounding New York City, and on another program we'll be talking about that. But those are just some small things that have happened. And even though the bicentennial provides an excellent opportunity to focus on the contributions and problems of black Americans, as you say the major media have not done nearly enough to do this. Merely wearing a bicentennial patch that says "76" on it is not enough. So as one of our responsibilities, you and I and other black educators try to inform the public about what has happened in these literally 350 years since blacks have been in America. As a historian, how would you break down the major epochs of black American history? What are the major time periods or the major issues that you see black American history broken into?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:05:15.900
Well I think an important epoch, important event, was the decision--even before black Americans or even American Colonies were formed--was the decision in the 16th-century when Charles the Fifth decided to bring large numbers of African slaves to the New World to work in the plantations and the mines of New Grenada. I think that was a very important decision because large, large numbers of blacks then were introduced into the New World, and we have the black communities which are throughout the West Indies and in both North and South America and the...Central American Republics. I think the 17th-century major epoch was the introduction of blacks into the English colonies since 1619. Also important at that time was the introduction of large numbers of white women into the English colonies which caused the slavery in the English societies to be different than slavery in New World societies, mainly because of the type of social pattern that was set up through white women being more important in English society than they were in European society.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:06:39.230
Now could you develop that point? You say that the pattern of slavery was different in the English dominated colonies as from the French and the Spanish dominated colonies...

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:06:48.770
Yes, the English colonies were settler societies; they came with a permanency, with an idea of remaining. Whereas in the French and the Portuguese and Spanish societies, they were more exploitable--they were planning on exploiting the land and gaining quick fortunes and going back to their mother countries and you know living well in those countries. However in the English societies, because of the type of situation that existed in England, large numbers of English people--I suppose both male and female--were brought to the New World, and they were settler people. Now the importance of this is the fact that the English men were not able to take the native women--that is the Indians--or the slave women, and cohabit with them. They were thwarted in that effort by a system which we call hypogamy or hypergamy, which is the inability of a person--women, particularly--to marry below their level, below their social level, which then causes those women to put sanctions, social sanctions, on the men themselves. And this brought a new characteristic to New World slavery, especially English slave society.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:15.050
Now what was the final outcome of this characteristic? What was the final result of it?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:08:20.810
Tremendous growth and racism, intensive racism in this country which was...although we had racism developing in the other colonial possessions in the New World--French, Spanish, Dutch and so forth. It was it wasn't as intense...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:35.982
--and that's reason why you would see more intermarriage and cultural pluralism in Brazil where there were large numbers of slaves, who also came from West African coast, as against in the...so-called continental United States.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:08:52.790
Right. Intermarriage was recognized.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:54.881
Yeah, but however one of the things that I'm leading to is that, as anyone who walks the streets knows, that the whole spectrum of the color of black Americans ranges from very very light to very very dark. Which means that this hypergamy might have existed legally but there was certainly a lot of miscegenation or relations between people which produce children of mixed blood.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:09:19.401
That's correct. As a matter of fact, that is another that is another part of this whole problem, you see, is the definition of the black American...which is different than the definitions of mixed peoples throughout the New World. You see, all black Americans--regardless of what complexion they are, and many of them are really biologically white people--are defined as...black people. Whereas in Brazilian society and Cuban society, or in other parts of Latin America, that's not true. You have intermediary types of groups. But say, for example in Brazilian society, anyone with mixtures of caucusoid white blood would be classified as Caucasian or white.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:04.250
I see. In these societies like Brazil, do they really define race so rigidly, or is it less of a significant factor?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:10:13.322
Less of a significant factor; it's not as rigidly defined, although it's tremendous racism, but a different form of racism...a different type of racism in Brazilian society.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:23.550
All right, I think that lays out very clearly the basis for racism that has been perpetuated in America for three-hundred years. But as you look at the major epochs in black American history--other than this, which obviously puts an imprimatur on the whole question of racism--other than this, what would you consider to be the major epoch in black American history?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:10:45.950
Well other than other things...like the American Revolution, the growth of abolitionism, and finally the dissolution of the slave system in 19th century, the growth of the black communities and institutions like the masonry, the Freemasons societies, the black church and so forth...I think civil war and reconstruction. And the two world wars, and then the "Plessy vs. Ferguson" case. I think that the pivotal points of the Civil War reconstruction with the "Plessy vs. Ferguson" case and the "Brown vs. Topeka" ["Brown vs. Board of Education"] case in 1954 are probably the two most important things that helped form or develop the black American.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:11:34.621
All right for the audience's benefit, the "Plessy vs. Ferguson" case is the case in 1896 that for the first time ruled segregation "legal." It said that facilities could be separate and equal and that had to do with trains and schools and hotels etc.. And the 1954 "Brown vs. Topeka Kansas Board of Education" case ruled...really overturned "Plessy vs. Ferguson" and said that nothing can really be separate and equal, and it was illegal to have segregated facilities in schools, and then that was extended to trains, and then finally through the Civil Rights Act of 1965 it extended to all forms of public accommodation so that in fact in 1976 we do not have legally sanctioned racial segregation. And that has given rise to such things as affirmative action programs and that kind of thing. But we still have this lingering residue. And we shouldn't say 'lingering'... this very pertinent residue of racism in society which leads us to say, or ask...as black Americans, where do we go from here? What are some of your opinions about that?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:12:45.980
You know as first...as a historian it is very difficult for a historian to take any one event and say it is most important. As you know there's a whole series of things that have happened throughout our sojourn here in America. And the question, "Where do we go from here?"...I think that when we look back at history the periods and the events the different things that have happened historically with the introduction of the black into the new world...I think that we must remember that, well, the black man came into the new world. He was an immigrant just like the other Europeans that came into the new world. However, it was forced emigration and there were there were situations that caused this from the outside. It was not not only internal, but external. And I think that the future of the black American is not only going to be internal developments but external developments.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:13:45.650
In other words you think that what's happening in the world at large is going to influence us as well as what happens in the total society in terms of economic and social development.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:13:54.951
Right.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:13:54.957
This evening we're talking with Dr. Ralph Carter, who's Assistant Professor of History at Livingston College Rutgers University. And as we were saying, Ralph, American history has so many distortions in it about blacks. And when we try to assess where we've been and where we're going, it really does provide a lot of conflict and confusion for us. And as an historian, and as someone who's worked in the media and done writing and so on, what do you think that the main things that can be done--or should be done--to correct the distortions in American history about blacks?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:14:33.830
Well I think that one of the major problems with blacks themselves has been to search inwardly and and to seek their identity from themselves without realizing that they are part of the American social milieu, and that the basic problem in American society is not one of black identity or the definition of blacks, and the distortion of blacks in American history...but actually it's a problem of American identity. It's a problem of a distortion of what the American society actually is and was. Americans themselves have to come to grips with who they are and what they were.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:15:14.220
That's a very sophisticated point, and is one that I'm inclined to agree with. A lot of people when they hear that, don't understand that. They say blacks are American first and they have to identify with what has happened in America which has happened to blacks. And this probably comes under closest scrutiny when you begin to talk about Pan-African movements and American blacks go to Africa and they find that they're version of Pan-Africanism really isn't too widely accepted among the African peoples themselves, which indicates that black Americans have been highly Americanized, in a sense. Yet because of the almost foreign reception that we have received in the American continent, there's a tendency not to easily want to identify with being Americans. So could you elaborate a little bit more on why you feel that in order to first deal with the distortions about blacks in American history, we have to look at American history itself?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:16:18.910
Yes I think that, and I think rightly so---it's the reaction of American blacks to turn to Africa and I think that that is a correct thing to do is to go back to one's origins. However at the same time, one cannot run away from the reality that what has happened here is not only vicious oppression of black people but intense social rejection; and this social rejection by whites towards blacks have caused blacks to...have a distorted understanding of the reality itself. And I think that for whites, they have to come to grips with themselves that...they have to come to grips with the fact that this is a multiracial, multi-ethnic society that has been mixing for three and a half centuries. For example, Alan Payton, the great South African writer, said once, "If one can say that one drop of blood in one's veins causes one to be black," then what would one say is a country that has all white people in it but with one black person in that country? Now we're talking about a society that has upwards of 30 millions of black people in it. They mixed with blacks, they mixed with Indians, and they mixed intensely with this group. Large numbers of blacks have always, once they have become what we'd call 'octaroons,' or have one eighth black blood and seven eights whites, would blend right into the society. And this has gone on for hundreds of years. The anthropologists and statisticians tell us that every year between five and ten thousand blacks disappear into white society now. We're talking about hundreds of thousands then. And then we're actually talking about a very mixed society now. And the society the majority of people have to come to grips with the fact that we're a mixed society: a multiracial, multi-ethnic society. And when we talk about melting pots, maybe we can get...we can come to grips with that if we say that we are all Americans. And we're not 'hyphenated-American,' for example.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:18:34.511
But of course as you talk about using this as a mechanism for eliminating distortions about blacks, that means that some mode of communication some mode of discussion some mode of articulation has to be developed to deal with this...because racism is very virulent in America. We were saying before the Kerner report back at the time of the riots in 1968 said that America was moving rapidly into two societies: one black and one white. Even today, as the schools in Louisville, Kentucky, become integrated as we look at the situation in Boston, we find tremendous resistance of whites relating to blacks. Now how can we really say that the way to eliminate the distortions is for everyone to look at the American experience? How can we really do that, or do you have another way of approaching that? Admittedly, programs like this in the media help to communicate this idea, but it's more than one radio program, more than one television program.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:19:39.520
This is a...this discussion naturally could go on for hours and days and weeks, and great social scientists far beyond myself have discussed this. For example the Kerner Commission Report, when Kenneth Clarke read it he said it sounded just like the reports after New York--the Harlem riots of '35, '36. It sounded just like the Chicago Riot Commission report it...as a matter of fact, it was the same report almost, even though Kerner and them probably hadn't meant this to be. It was almost exact same report. The thing here we're talking about not only are socio-political fallout, but we're talking about economic, uh, an economic problem. Because racism has been very profitable for the American society: to have an underclass, a class to hold in check. In labor, for example, you can always use them to keep wages at a certain position. It's used in a number of ways. I think even one thing that I see in the 20th century was the growth of Marxism, in terms of providing other alternatives, especially economic alternatives, not for...not only for people around the world, but for blacks in America. Many of the great intellectuals that we know--black intellectuals--in our society came out of their training in the Marxist tradition. However, to move further into what what you were talking about...it's very difficult not to see that, as Professor John Hope Franklin showed, the Founding Fathers...to distort them as being men so nobly and so so highly set that they were the most famous men that ever lived and that these men were almost angelic...and not to show that the majority of them were either slave holders or men of property and standing that viciously determined, during the constitutional period, to keep Amer...uh, some parts of Americans--black Americans--as property, and to hold them as lowas you would an animal. This was a part of our society that we try to ignore. I know...I took a tour this summer when I was down working in the National Archives Library of Congress. I went through George Washington's home, and what they had done is actually just erased the slave huts and said, "These are some of the things that were done around the plantation were done by 'Negro artisans,' and not by slaves." This has all been erased out. This is too vicious, too angry, to admit. These are the type of distortions that...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:22:21.980
Those are clearly examples of the distortions. Now in terms of getting rid of those distortions...what I was asking is: what can be done? Do we need to rewrite textbooks? Do we need status white historians to tell it like it is? For example, there are people like C. Vann Woodward who very clearly describe the racism in the south. Do we need more development of more folk heroes who go back into time were black--people like Jim Beckworth who discovered Beckworth Path and people like Daniel Hale Williams who did the first open heart surgery, things of this type? Do we need to do that to begin to get the average person to understand the contributions of blacks to American history and to also understand the racist tradition in which blacks have fought? There's still a number of white people who don't even know the crucial contributions of Frederick Douglass in the abolition movement. Who don't know that about 300,000 blacks fought for their own freedom in the Civil War. Who don't know that blacks earned more medal of honor, Congressional Medal of Honors in the Spanish American War than any other group. And and so on and so on and so on. What do you think we need to clear the record?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:23:46.310
I think personally--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:23:47.210
To right the record, really.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:23:48.970
And I agree with you that all of these things have to be done, and it needs to be done through textbooks, and naturally the media: radio and television, the great media that they are, could do a far more tremendous job. However I think that the basic...the basic thrust and change will have to be in the economic sphere. It will have to be the decision made by top leaders in industry, commerce and government, that we have to begin allowing significant numbers of blacks to move not only into, uh, into the mainstream of American life economically--that is not only in the building trades and things like that--but like yourself, for example, not just into radio or television but into significant power positions where this type of change, economically, can be made to the point that you don't have a black underclass to point to. Once that comes about. that is the end of the type of racism we have because...any day in the week, we could even talk about great heroes, great black cowboys, black in the American revolution. But if you always have to point to a significant sector of the society as being the pariahs of that society, then the amount of literature that we shoot out to little white kids will be insignificant because their sight--uh the sight and sound of black America--will be the underclass, and it won't make any significant change.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:25:27.620
You're really taking a socio-philosophical position and outlook in answering the question. You're saying that, in fact, you don't really believe that the distortions of blacks in American history will be adequately corrected until such time as the racism that exists in society is eliminated, and you don't think that's going to happen until there's some kind of economic parity.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:25:50.371
That's correct.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:25:51.461
Or do you believe that the economic parity will precede the elimination of racism?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:25:58.080
I think...I think the decision, the economic parity, will just eliminate, automatically eliminate racism. I think that racism itself is a means of social control. I think that one cannot eliminate racism without making the decision to eliminate certain types of poverty in the society. Certain types of vicious discrimination and poverty in the society--not only towards blacks, but towards other groups. But you can control the other groups, mainly because you have that black underclass.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:26:31.620
All right. As we come toward the close of the program, could you reflect on which book, or which series of books, or which epoch of black American history you would suggest a person to read, to get probably the clearest articulation as to what has happened to blacks in America?

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:26:50.730
I think that the great book on the history of black Americans is still Dr. John Hope Franklin's "From Slavery to Freedom." I think that is an excellent and outstanding book for the...for the professional or the layman. Also the person who is going into a more deeper study would be "White Over Black" by Winthrop Jordan, and for a person in the high school levels, I'd say Lerone Bennett's book "Before the Mayflower."

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:22.510
But I suppose I'd counter that by saying probably you'd guess most of what has happened to black Americans, even though it's an old book, in W. E. B. DuBois' "The Souls of Black Folk." Which from a philosophical point of view, will describe as clearly as possible the depths of racism in society and also the dilemmas and the contributions that black Americans have made in the society.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:27:48.000
I accept, I agree, yes.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:49.501
And of course what that really does say to people like yourself who are historians is that you have a responsibility to do what you're doing tonight. That is to talk not only with students, but with community groups and with scholars to help them to continually evaluate and re-evaluate the black American experience.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:28:11.760
Thank you. I appreciate even being on the radio program with you.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:28:15.370
Okay. Well we had a lot of fun when we were doing television together.

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:28:17.691
Definitely.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:28:17.693
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Dr. Ralph Carter, who is Assistant Professor of History at Livingston College Rutgers University, and we've been talking about the way in which the bicentennial has helped us to focus on the epochs in black American history, and where we need to go in America to illuminate the blight of racism and to help black people be able to live a life that was intended in the Declaration of Independence. Thanks again for being a guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Dr. Ralph Carter 00:28:45.960
Thank you very much for having me.

