Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.880
Are today's Black athletes contributing to the Black community? Dean Meminger, New York basketball star is one who does. Hear him discuss the role of the Black athlete in today's society. On tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:34.961
This is "Soul of Reason." A program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:01.420
Our guest on "Soul of Reason" tonight is Dean Meminger, former New York Knick and now Atlanta Hawk basketball star. Dean is a member of the board of the Sports Foundation which is a Harlem based youth organization and also contributes to a variety of causes in both the Black, the Hispanic and the overall New York City community. Glad to have you with us tonight Dean.

Dean Meminger 00:01:22.061
Thank you, Dr. Brown.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:23.800
Well, we--you woke up a few weeks ago and found out that you had been traded, as all athletes are from time to time, from the New York Knicks to the Atlanta Hawks. And you're such a favorite in New York both because of your community service, but also because of your dynamic playing and your enthusiasm and your intelligence, that a lot of New Yorkers were really sorry to see you go. At the same time, you are now going to a new city, a city which has a large Black population, a Black mayor, and is a place which is often called the New York of the South. So what are some of your reactions to being traded. What are some of the things you look forward to in your new career in Atlanta?

Dean Meminger 00:02:08.139.99999999998545
Well, Dr. Brown when I found out initially, Red Holzman called me about 11:05 in the morning--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:13.570
You remember the time-- [laughter]

Dean Meminger 00:02:16.680
I remember the time because I was just getting out of bed. Once he called me, I knew what was happening because the fact--I think I confronted the problem prior to that, like two months before the season ended. And in confronting the problem I think I resolved the problem in the sense that I realize there are certain people that was necessitated--to build a New York system, and like, I was--I wasn't one of those people and I realized that Red had--and the management had to protect certain people like Walt [Frazier], Earl [Monroe], Bill Bradley, Phil Jackson, John Gianelle and Willis Reed. And subsequently I think he had to protect Mel Davis because Mel is one of his up-and-coming stars especially in the frontline and he had four healthy guards, so if I was placed in the same situation, I would have put Henry Bibby and Dean Meminger on the expansion draft too. And therefore New Orleans [unintelligible] only pick like one of the guards and he still has three healthy guards so, business-wise and from professional perspective, I think Red did the best thing he could. I feel that, you know, I don't miss playing basketball per se in New York but what I'll miss is the social and personal aspects of my life. I've been involved in a lot of community programs and I've just been involved in New York City as a whole and I just think professionally-speaking that this is the biggest break in my career. I just think I have to make the most of it and go apply myself and use all my energies towards going to law school and basketball and become a basketball freak again.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:53.481
That's very interesting, what you said dramatizes very clearly both the charm and the intelligence of Dean Meminger. The fact that you can evaluate so clearly the alternatives that the management had, and whereas not necessarily being ecstatic about it happening, taking it as a challenge, recognizing why it happened, and then setting some new goals and some new plateaus to strike for. And that's part of Dean Meminger and that's part of the type of thing that I particularly--and a number of people in the Black community--like about what's happening to some of our younger Black athletes--the intelligence, the persistence, the drive, the willingness to strike out into new ventures.

Dean Meminger 00:04:39.520
Well definitely Roscoe. I think the time has come to pass where an athlete can be ignorant of a lot of facts of life--not distant, professional sports, but in the world. I think he has to be a total person because he's in a position to influence a lot of people especially Black athletes who young kids aspire to be like, because they're one of the few models that kids can emulate. And I feel that we're in a position that we have influence upon a lot of people and we have to use that influence positively in the sense that we have to get involved in programs and I think we have to instill in younger people that athletics especially on an amateur level. I don't know what you want to call [laughs] when you want to start and then that--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:20.630
[crosstalk] --probably ends at little league--

Dean Meminger 00:05:21.851
[crosstalk] --grammar school-- [laughter]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:22.961
--college [unintelligible] pro now--

Dean Meminger 00:05:26.840
I think we have to instill in these young youngsters the fact that basketball is just a means to an end and it's not an end in itself. I think sports in general is good and it helps to establish rapport and communications among people and help people to realize that--Hey, we're in a world together--and to make this a better world. We have to develop new value systems and building devices because I think it's where--is the individual that things start, but it's not the external structure of society, you know, as long as we are confused individually and we're mixed up and we have mixed emotions about certain issues and certain problems that we confront in life. I think the external structures of society will reflect what we are internally.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:09.510
Now you mentioned earlier that you were thinking about going to law school and this is something that a few athletes recently have begun to think about. What are some of the motivations in your mind for going to law school? Are you thinking about possibly what you would do after your career? Are you thinking about the fact that this enables you to use your reputation in athletics to be able to be useful to people in a variety ways? Are you thinking about it in terms of business? What are some of the motivation--because this is the type of thing that many athletes should be thinking about.

Dean Meminger 00:06:44.540
Well definitely Roscoe. I just feel that there are certain athletes who have the capabilities are going on to further their education and I feel that I'm in that position--and I feel retrospectively that sports has opened a lot of doors for me. It's helped me to meet you--a lot of people--a lot of important people in my life who've had a hell of influence on me as a person and I feel that, you know, I want to be in a position such that when I get ready to finish my professional career as an athlete, I can finish without worrying about where is my next dollar coming from. Being in a very precarious situation whereby I don't know what I'm gonna do in life. I think a man is supposed to be someone who knows his goals and knows his objectives and has a means of reaching those goals and objectives. I just think that I can better--in the service to my community and service to the world and try to make this a better place by pursuing a law degree and helping people in various fields, the legalities.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:42.640
See, it's very interesting, you highlighted the dilemma of the athlete--on one hand the the athlete is idolized by people, wanting your autograph telling you how great you are, your name's on the back of the newspaper or the front of the newspaper--on the other hand you have a very limited time perspective in terms of when you're really functioning--five years, ten years, maybe fifteen years--and then you still, retired or not playing at the age of thirty-two, thirty-four, thirty-six, thirty-eight--and an entire life in front of you. And what you are saying that you, Dean Meminger, feel you need to get your head together and your life together, your skills together, while you're still playing so that when you cease playing, you'll be able to be of service not only to yourself but to your community.

Dean Meminger 00:08:31.250
You know--definitely Roscoe, you hit the point on the head. I think for too long the athlete, especially a Black athlete, has been stereotyped as being someone can only run up and down the court or throw a baseball, throw a football. But like I said I think that time's come to pass. I think athletes--I think it's a tragic thing that athletes almost dissect it, in the sense--and fragment--in the sense that people have a tendency not to realize that they are complete, total individuals and they have political views, they have social views, they have a philosophical points--they have philosophical points in life. And like--it's very difficult in the sports--or in society, as we had, whereby people, and especially young people, put you on a pedestal. And placed in your net pedestal I think they create a problem and that problem is lack of communications between that person on a pedestal and the person below. And I think, once they put you on a pedestal that--they expect for you to respond and react in a certain way, and when you react differently, they either call you a very arrogant or militant athlete, a very political athlete. You know, I think I want to be called a political athlete. I think I want to be aware of what's happening from day to day anywhere outside of basketball, because like you just said, your tenure in the game is a very limited one and like, in that sense, like you can't go on for twenty, thirty years being an athlete. And I think for some people at professional athletics is very degrading in the sense that you're just a commodity, and like, it gets to the point where sometime in life you can get fed up with that and maybe you want to do something else.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:10.601
Speaking of athletics and the larger society you are very active with the Sports Foundation, which is a group that was organized by Bob Williams, who was a former basketball captain at New York University some years ago, to use sports as a means of guidance and counseling and opening up new avenues of social responsibility to young people. What are some of the things that you've done in your capacity as a member of the advisory committee of the Sports Foundation to help it move along?

Dean Meminger 00:10:40.240
Well my philosophy is the fact that--I contend that many state and city agencies and municipalities have been remiss in their duties and responsibilities to the community and the development of their young people. And I think as a result of that, subsequently a lot of the weight has fallen a lot of community programs such as Sports Foundation, Harlem Professional League, etc. And in that sense, a lot of the weight has fallen on the athlete. I think, in that sense he's responsible to the young people because they've put in--put him in a position of influence. I just feel that a--you know, I can't speak for any other athletes myself. I think, I know--you know, young people if they're involved in structured programs, or they keep themselves busy, or they're involved in education. I just feel it's necessary that you educate yourself totally. That doesn't mean necessary in academic education but it means academic in conjunction with social, political and physical education. I think if you stifle your development of your body, I think you--consequently your mind is not alert--as alert as should be. And I feel the athlete's role in today has changed somewhat. I don't think he no longer just be a gladiator, somebody that's entertaining people. I think he has to be involved in the totality of his being in the sense that he has to be involved in every facet of life, especially in his community, especially where he is [unintelligible] respected the most. Most black athletes do come from the ghetto, and like, in that sense they have to make a contribution. You know, and I realize that, you know, I'm young and I'm a bachelor and I'm single. So like a lot of responsibilities maybe a married man had, or somewhat somebody who's involved in a lot of businesses, maybe--might not have as much time as that--and not allow for that. Because I realize that, you're in the game for maybe ten years at the most, and you got to maximize on what you can make in life, from the financial perspective. But in the same breath I think you do have an obligation to young people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:49.470
Well, speaking of that obligation in terms of the Sports Foundation, I know that you spend literally hundreds of hours working with small groups of young people, tutoring them in basketball techniques. But beyond that, just going to the various functions of the Sports Foundation, the Harlem Junior Olympics, the track meet, the karate exhibitions, the boxing matches, the softball games, and the girls' basketball games. Working with some of the officials, the young men who go--and young women--who officiate these games, to help them both in organizing--developing organizational skills--but also giving some of your basketball knowledge and also some of your social and counseling philosophy. I gather, just from observing you, that you enjoy very much working with young people. You like to talk with them--you like to talk with them face to face rather than talk with them in terms of a crowd--large crowds.

Dean Meminger 00:13:48.241
Well definitely, I believe in the personal--person-to-person conversation and dialogue. I just feel that young people are very exciting and fascinating and I just want to get involved and do as much as I can. You know, I think the least I can do is make appearances and counsel young people and give them advice in certain areas especially involving the decision to go to school--what you should take in school, or what you should pursue as a vocation.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:16.880
[crosstalk] Or what school you should attend.

Dean Meminger 00:14:17.280
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:17.282
I noticed one thing that they were recruiting one of the great basketball players--I think his name was Butch Lee--

Dean Meminger 00:14:23.911
Butch Lee.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:23.913
--and I think he ended up at Marquette, your alma mater, but one of the things that was pointed up in the press, now you told me personally, is that you didn't feel that you needed to put any extra pressure on Butch or anyone else to sell Marquette or any school--

Dean Meminger 00:14:38.851
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:39.120
There were many schools that might meet the needs of young people, and that ultimately it is the student himself, the athlete himself, who has to make that decision.

Dean Meminger 00:14:49.020
Well Roscoe, you know being in a comparable position four, five years--six, seven years ago--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:55.450
Yeah, time goes fast.

Dean Meminger 00:14:55.454
Time is flying by. Going back seven years ago, you know, I realized the various pressures that he encountered in being a renowned high school athlete, you know. He's probably gotten coaches to take him out to dinner, taken to this school, taken to this place. I knew when I was going through those changes, I got fed up with it and got to the point where I just wanted to make a decision. And I didn't want to be an additional pressure on Butch because I felt that he had enough to contend with at the moment, and I felt that by me putting my two cents in, I felt I had nothing to contribute. And I feel that--I'm interested in Butch Lee--not that I'm not interested in Marquette University, but Marquette is going to survive whether Butch Lee goes to school there or not. And I feel that Butch Lee has to go to an institution where he can maximize his physical abilities in basketball--'cause he's--since he's a Blue Chip high school ball player, he's probably capable--has a lot of abilities and if he goes to the right school whereby he can use his abilities, I think he can play professional sports. And I think in this sense I'm interested in Butch Lee as a person because he's Black, and I realize that sports is one of the main avenues that are open to Black people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:04.891
Of course the other point, and it's one that I personally make quite often, and that is that any college that takes an athlete has an obligation to see that he gets an education. Which means that the selection of a college by an athlete has to be related to the extent to which he perceives that college is serious about seeing that he gets the type of counseling, tutoring, courses--that will cause him to end up with a degree. Because ultimately, despite all of the professional contracts or what have you, the main thing that an athlete should get out of going to college is an education symbolized by a degree.

Dean Meminger 00:16:42.760
I couldn't agree with you more Roscoe. I think an education has top priority in today's society. I feel that if you go to school four years, get a certificate of attendance, or you go to school four years and be exploited by that institution because, you know, you use--and in return you should use that institution to get an education--to develop yourself as a person totally. And I think in that sense that I can say, at Marquette University Al McGuire has done a hell of a job with especially Black athletes from the metropolitan area. I can't think of one who has gone four years who hasn't graduated. And he's got a thing whereby, if you don't graduate, like in four years, the school will send you over, you know.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:25.452
Let me ask the question-- Tonight we're talking with Dean Meminger, New York basketball star who is now with the Atlanta Hawks and is very active in a variety of activities in the New York metropolitan area. We're talking about the role of sports in the lives of Black youth and very specifically what you were saying about the young men who stay in college for four years and graduate. There's something new that has developed known as the so-called "hardship situation"--hardship case, whereby some type of certification--college athletes are identified as having financial hardship, and then are drafted away from their college after they've played one or two or three years. I can understand the financial pressures and particularly the pressures of the leagues to get these players in when they're very good--Dr. J, Julius Erving, being one of them. But I also have some real misgivings about the extent of which the professional leagues really should put themselves into a position to seduce young men away from their education before they complete it. What are some of your views on this? They don't necessarily have to be consonant with mine or with the basketball establishment--

Dean Meminger 00:18:40.121
Definitely not.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:40.123
I'd be interested in what you have to say about that.

Dean Meminger 00:18:42.610
Well you know, the hardship case--I think there are advantages and disadvantages to the hardship case. And I think that depends on the individual situation. I feel that there are a lot of people in the world in financial difficulty and they need money. And a lot of Black athletes who more or less father their families even though they are going to school pursuing an education. They have financial responsibilities because maybe their father's dead, their mother's dead, and they're helping one of the parents support the family. In that particular case, I think it's necessary--you have a moral obligation if it comes up, that you can get some money. Now in another sense, I spoke with several people that I think made a bad decision in order to go hardship. If you go hardship say, in your sophomore or junior year there's only so much money you can demand. You know, and I feel that if you just go an additional year and get your--get an education, you'll be of that much more value because PR is 50 percent of your contract anyway and like, you can only receive so much PR through your freshman and your sophomore year because the PR is delegated to most of the juniors and seniors and upperclassmen. But I feel in that sense it hurts a lot of guys. Plus, physically-speaking, I don't think a lot of people at nineteen and twenty are just ready for professional sports, mentally or physically. I think it terminates a lot of people's careers early.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:13.050
That's a very interesting point and an additional point is that it tends to suggest that colleges are minor leagues for professional teams, which in fact is probably the case, but it tends to make it so much more dramatic that when you talk with some high school basketball players, you don't ask them--when you ask them what are they going to do by going to college, they say "I'm going to play basketball." It's not "I'm going to take Pre-Law" or "I'm going to become an accountant" or whatever--"I'm going to play basketball." And whereas basketball or football might be a means, it certainly should not be an end. And I think this hardship case tends to make it very, very clear that for many young people and for many colleges, the professional route is in fact the end.

Dean Meminger 00:20:59.192
Definitely. And since you have a sports-oriented society, they reinforce this all the time. I made a statement in the paper, you know, several months ago, to the fact that--I think I was a professional athlete when I was in grammar school. I got recruited at a grammar school at the tender age of twelve, thirteen--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:18.607
[crosstalk] Wow.

Dean Meminger 00:21:19.320
I think that psychol--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:21.513
Psychologically you were a professional and in some ways, possibly you might even get scholarships.

Dean Meminger 00:21:23.970
[crosstalk] Psychologically I think it is very difficult for a youngster of that tender age to deal with that problem of recruitment. And I think from the time I was in eighth grade I've been recruited all my life. And in that sense I think I've been a professional athlete because they paid me to the extent that they sent me to school and books and--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:43.800
Car fare, and lunch money, and so on.

Dean Meminger 00:21:44.282
--or whatever. And you know, like, I think in that sense you're being paid, like you say--I think colleges and universities are just farm systems for the professionals, you know. And it's tragic in the sense it has to be that way because I think sports in the amateur level is a very beautiful thing.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:02.250
You are a very fortunate young man, you must have had some strong family influences and some great teachers to be able to put this in perspective because you're quite right. There're literally thousands of youth, many of them Black youth, many of them Black youth from the ghetto, who are hounded and recruited for whatever their physical skills are. I also know that you are a good teacher. I saw you working and coaching the Parochial All-Stars in the Sports Foundation High School Classic--the public All-Stars versus the Parochial and private All-Stars--and everyone commented on what a fine teacher you are. And I note that you are going to do some teaching this summer. You are planning a series of basketball camps which you call the Dean Meminger Basketball Schools. Could you tell us something about that? What is your objective in getting into this? Other than the business aspect of it but knowing you, that you have objectives beyond that. I know that in addition to the camps that you're running, in the more affluent neighborhoods which require money, people pay for. You also are running some camps in the Harlem community which will be either low cost or no cost. So could you tell us something about your objectives in this area?

Dean Meminger 00:23:21.690
Well, basically Roscoe, the idea originated through Bob Williams--Bob Williams is President-Director of Sports Foundation. Bob, you know, spent several years in Spain playing semi-professional basketball. He returned to New York I guess '66-67. And I was president working with several programs in inner city--programs for the Urban League. And I wasn't necessarily happy with what was happening, the results of those programs. So I met Bob Williams and subsequently--I was impressed by Bob as a man, as an individual, as somebody being responsive to the sensitivities of young people. And I felt this is the area that I want to pursue because I was in a position of such that I influenced a lot of people, and I felt that to structure a program comparable to Sports Foundation--our Sports Foundation--I can work and meet a lot of kids. So like, you know, as a kid I never went to camp. I never went to a basketball camp. The first basketball camp I went to, I was an instructor. [laughs] And like I felt--I feel that a lot of kids miss a lot by not going away to camp, because financially-speaking their parents just can't afford to send them to camp--pay $150, $200. So Bob, myself, conceived this idea of an inner city basketball camp several years ago. And like, we just put--implementing this philosophy now, and we feel--we felt that kids who can't pay $150, or $175. So like, what we did this year, at a minimum cost of $75, we are introducing a new concept of basketball--inner city basketball where kids commute every day. The location is going to be Xaverian High School in Brooklyn New York. You know, if was left up to me, I wouldn't have the kids pay at all, but you know it's a business venture. I think it comes off more for the young people than for people involved from a business perspective.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:22.201
And of course at this camp you have some of your former teammates--

Dean Meminger 00:25:25.800
[crosstalk] Definitely-- [crosstalk] --you can use that, with the Knicks, working with these young people, and also-- --and the dates of the camp, Roscoe, happen to be August 26th to August 30th, and some of the stars that will be there will be Earl Monroe, Nate Archibald, Henry Bibby, Mel Davis, Harthorne Wingo--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:39.781
I think some of the parents will go too [unintelligible]-- [laughter]

Dean Meminger 00:25:39.791
Definitely, I hope so.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:45.511
Now, if anyone is interested how do they get in touch with you, or the sponsors of the camp or what have you? Because I know it's important when you're dealing with something like this, to be able to get people to come, because if you don't get people to come the concept doesn't develop.

Dean Meminger 00:26:01.201
And again, in conjunction with this particular camp that has been--is running in Brooklyn, Bob Williams and myself, we're going to sponsor an inner city basketball camp at 139th--the neighborhood that I grew up in--it's a park at 139th and Lenox. And I think-- this will be free camp for people in the community. I think this is the least that I can do for them. And I think a lot of young people look up to me and they respect me.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:25.110
What dates will those be, sometime during the month of August also?

Dean Meminger 00:26:28.950
Definitely, sometimes--probably during the Harlem Junior Olympics which is--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:33.390
Which is the third week of August. By the way do you have contact point?

Dean Meminger 00:26:37.650
Well, you know, if you wanna contact me for any further information, write: Dean Meminger All City Basketball Camp, Box 184, Staten Island, New York.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:48.630
Yeah, Box 184, Staten Island, New York. The Dean Meminger Inner City Basketball Camp.

Dean Meminger 00:26:53.161
[crosstalk] And if you'd like to call, it's area code is 212, the number is 698-0753.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:58.621
Area code 212--

Dean Meminger 00:26:59.221
698-0753.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:03.541
0753. All right, so folk who are interested in the Dean Meminger Basketball Camp can call area code 212-698-0753.

Dean Meminger 00:27:12.381
Yeah. Definitely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:13.501
Now as far as the program in Harlem, that will be coordinated out of the Sports Foundation park--I believe during union Olympic week they're gonna call it Sports Foundation Plaza at 139th and Lenox Avenue.

Dean Meminger 00:27:28.710
I think that's a good name--that they call us--the park. I think Bob has done so much for the community and I think, in calling the park Sports Foundation is a reflection of what he has done in the community. And Mrs. Green who is in charge of the park has done a wonderful job too--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:45.311
And you, Dean Meminger, have done a wonderful job. Lots of luck to Dean Meminger and Atlanta and with his many, many projects. Thanks for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Dean Meminger 00:27:54.451
Thank you Dr. Brown.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:27:55.980
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

