Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:01.290
"Short Eyes" a new play by Miguel Piñero has recently opened at the Vivian Beaumont Theater in Lincoln Center. Critical response has been unanimous in its acclaim for a great play by a new playwright. Here Miguel Piñero discuss his play on tonight "Soul of Reason.

Radio Bumper Intro. 00:00:37.960
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that will examine the roots of the Black Box of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:04.750
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" is Miguel Piñero who has given great acclaim for his new play "Short Eyes" which is now at the Vivian Beaumont Theater in Lincoln Center. This play opened sometime ago at the Riverside Church acclaimed so great that Joseph Papp brought it into the New York Shakespeare Festival at Lincoln Center. So Miguel could you begin our discussion tonight by this reflecting on your reaction to the reactions to the play? Did you really expect this kind of reaction and how do you feel about the reaction?

Miguel Piñero 00:01:37.901
I did not expect this kind of reaction at all. When I wrote the play you know I figured the family was going to do it at Riverside Church. When I first wrote out, I know it was gonna be done.I felt it. But when it was gonna be at Riverside Church, I just figured it would have a straight weeks you know. And then we'll probably do keep it a repertory somehow. When it blew up in the papers the way it did you know all the critics came down. And one of the few times at a television has come off off Broadway you know to view your play you know. Like a lot of it. I was really taken by that.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:02:22.450
It went really kind of circular.

Miguel Piñero 00:02:23.651
Yeah. Well you know, it just it was like a lot of it was unreal you know

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:02:29.023
Now, the play actually revolves around some young man, young man's life, young man's life in prison, the way in which they're responding to an oppressive society and what it does to people as a result of this oppression. And the term short eyes itself has a particular connotation and meaning. Could you indicate what this is and why you chose this as the title of the play?

Miguel Piñero 00:02:54.170
Well, the term short eyes is a corruption of the word short highs which means short highs means pornography, a small steel. Short eyes came because Puerto Ricans couldn´t pronounce short highs. So we used to say short eyes. After a while, you know, as you get away from prison to prison, the words short eyes became to mean people that like to look at small things. I became a child molester or, you know, so forth. I chose short eyes because the play revolves around a person who is coming to the prison for that crime. He's committed, well he's been charged with you know having molested a young girl.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:40.211
And of course in the hierarchy of what

00:03:43.504
In this prison structure

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:44.952
In prison structure that´s lowest thing in the hierarchy of the way in which

Miguel Piñero 00:03:50.771
the plain thing is residing today you know like uh people are emotionally sick. You know, we still tend to see them as criminals and we still tend to see them as animals. And we don't stop to look at them as human beings who are sick you know who need some kind of help. And well the same just a reflection of society just that it's more intense. Prisoners in a society within a society just more intense. So.

Speaker 3 00:04:20.140
Now in reaching for the if we could say there is one central theme that we through play other than the repression of the society and the inequity of the prison and so on what is that central theme that you are trying to project through short eyes.

Speaker 8 00:04:36.070
I don't know. I don't really.

00:04:38.742
That's a hard question ask them. Yeah. You know what I'm saying is that I write you know like I wrote the play. And like I really didn't know what the hell I wrote until about it was done at the Apollo Theater a few times almost at the end of the theater when I really start to look at it. And when I went to Philadelphia and I saw the play again I stood away from the play a long time and I really looked at it and realized what the hell I wrote you know. It was just as the liberty to then to say spiritual kind of guidance you're just getting it out.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:16.340
Now you wrote the play I believe you started writing it and singing yeah in prison and it was completed there.

Speaker 8 00:05:23.560
Now I know the note wasn't completely as you said it wasn't completed. Oh I thought it was completed and I began I completed the first act of singing and as I was getting into the second act my parole papers came up. So I'd sold my typewriter I'd throw everything at them and it is not the manuscript. Then at the Met is just the typewriter and everything else on my cell I gave away and I just relax for the two weeks that I was there is like myself and my soul is relaxed you know preparing for the streets I No no no great writers have come from our prisons are oppressive as they are now.

Speaker 9 00:06:01.160
Is this because writing is one of the few legitimate outlets that you find for your emotions in prison.

Speaker 7 00:06:09.420
Yeah I believe so. That's why the reason I began writing was that I used to always be rapping in the yard in the bricks immigration rules and there were you know the guys would always try to cool my rap you know.

Speaker 10 00:06:28.350
So what I did I started writing poetry and I used to place it up on the walls and Sophie and just hand it out and I used to play a card and have you know a lot of them made and distribute throughout the prison. I just kept I read it they couldn't stop. They could stop me from talking because they put me in a box. They could it and they'll keep like me but I used to write and I used to get it off.

Speaker 9 00:06:54.660
You know what I wanted to say now. Recognizing the fact that at least in my opinion opinions of people many of our prisons are very oppressive.

Speaker 11 00:07:05.640
Oh why would guards and so on decide to stop creative activity like poetry like rapping.

Speaker 12 00:07:16.170
Is it because the rapping really gets down to what's wrong with the society and I think that if people get involved in this in large numbers they might be inclined to move to do something about it.

Speaker 13 00:07:26.870
Is that what's really the line that you have to realize in a deposition where they're at. You know first of all the big foot could do hickeys you who don't realize you know what we're rapping about in the first place. You know and the City in Tennessee a bunch of Puerto Rico is talking they're up by no light. By and then the banging on drums and they're getting it all. Then it hits a bulletin in the background. Do shopping you know. And then somebody come out. And this Muslim brother is talking about our lives about it so they don't know what's going on. You know this is not showing their minds. So you know it's the hope that they're being tolerant a whole different world. So this act right away to become frightened.

Speaker 10 00:08:04.320
And then of when you have people who are supposed to have like I have a sixth grade education and other people that need know it and then they see he was talking and. And we make some sense of what we're saying. Then they start ghettos. They don't tell you to stop talking then I say OK stop talking but they make it difficult for you to say well I'm one of four people in the crowd you know in this section of the yard or you know don't walk on this side and you don't talk on decide you know things like that they just make it difficult for you.

Speaker 14 00:08:40.650
And of course they respond that their response to your response is to become even more rejecting sounds more oppressive. Yeah yeah. Well which is part of the that's part of the cycle of the sickness of society that society provides conditions that cause many people young black young Puerto Rican young Chicano males to. Act out in various ways which society punishes then the punishment which is supposed to be rehabilitation ends up to be another form of oppression of society. And then the men the young men respond in a certain way which causes the system the guards the wardens and so on to respond in another way. Is anything in your play short eyes that deals with maybe what society ought to do. I was reading in the paper the other day that one one judge I believe said what we will do is just close our prisons. His point was that prisons really aren't doing anything in terms of rehabilitation that they are role of keeping people away from society isn't a particularly useful one. So why not close our prisons. Well have you thought about alternatives like this. You've written about alternatives at this time.

Speaker 8 00:10:04.510
No I've thought about that alternative but like the play Oh it's just a slice of life in prison. So I try and I try to keep away from morals you know moral endings when they say there is a mole and they don't see it as a moral ending. When a guy says this ain't no pawnshop you know I don't see that as a moral ending. It's just a statement.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:28.560
That's a statement that you actually probably have heard and lived through. Yeah. And you're reflecting in your writing and this is something I notice a number of young black and Puerto Rican writers are doing now. And that is in their writing reflecting just the way in which they see and saw what goes on in their particular environment describing it without placing any judgment on it.

Speaker 15 00:10:50.880
And this I think represents a development from the revolutionary writings of the late 60s where everything was interpreted in theory. Yeah I think it's because in Manon or Che Guevara or what have you.

Speaker 16 00:11:07.890
Now many of the writings of both the blacks and Puerto Ricans are reflecting the way in which those writers see and perceive the life around them as you know what's happening is I think today is tied up in the late 60s you know like myself and also young Lord and so follow that I think is that we we let a party where the panther lords Rainbow Coalition whatever it was you know make our politics for us as artists right and as artists as writers painters poets filmmakers whatever we're theater. I think you know we should you know devout make our own politics you know. Right. And. We're not even get into politics. We'll get into what is right and wrong. The Justice the equality of whatever it is that we're looking for and I think doing the 60s we became you know so like let poetry like poetry or reporting about you know it was revolutionary was strong you know very angry because I was I was at the party was dictating my politics. And it also dictated my poetry in a sense you know and then at the party it never came to me I said OK. This is where you got to write it and blah blah blah blah. But being in that environment you know. That poetry came out that way I think is that we will actually become a you know we're getting word we are identifying ourselves as artists you know let's say this is interesting because you say that was the party.

Speaker 15 00:12:38.730
The feelings of the movement you indicated you wrote on the other hand maybe you wouldn't be the bigger open your or you are today if you hadn't written about talked about acted out.

Speaker 12 00:12:50.080
Some of that anger. But I definitely I wouldn't know.

Speaker 17 00:12:52.720
Our society has thrust upon you and me and others who are black and Puerto Rican by the general system.

Speaker 15 00:13:02.230
So the developmental frame is that you talk about you write about it you cast about it you project about it. And then after all that happens you see that even though maybe a few things have changed the overriding social conditions that you deal with man against man man against Brother men and women peoples money systems et cetera remain the same. And an insightful experience like a prison experience probably helps to bring this to a very highly crystallized point which then sharpens itself in your writing. Like for example you said earlier that you didn't in writing short eyes describe morality. What have you yet. In a couple of sentences ago you said Well as you look at the society the right and the wrong. So what you're really saying is that you didn't get out was say this is right or wrong. But you describe situations which in the least in your perception and probably mine we would perceive as elements of right and wrong.

Speaker 16 00:14:06.340
See I look at things as documents you know like poetry's documentary. I think poets are historians and that you know they document history for us. So a poet would write say OK to cross the desk to read it might be wrong. So you'll write in a way playwrights you know will take a guy of course and read you know you'll have a whole different you know dramatic sense about Bartolo. But the thing is that it's not to to say okay cause an aggressive read is wrong but to state you I guess to put it there right and let people decide let people make their own choices. You know that's what I'm saying is that. And then there was that sense in my time when I was first began writing poetry where were my poems you were saying well this is the way this is the way you know there's only one way you know. And now I say well hey you choose the way you know here's Joe Blow his frankly suitcase. OK let's see what's happening with these two brothers here. Let's choose.

Speaker 7 00:15:12.510
You know I think we should start making decisions of ourselves because that that with all our lives people that make making decisions for us I know that they're making decisions for me or my life.

Speaker 16 00:15:21.430
You know judges have been telling me I need to be rehabilitated. Right. Cops have been telling me that I'm wrong. You know the whole social contract you know it's always been you you're wrong. And this is the way it is. Now we've got to rehabilitate you though I do this for you. All of this for you. And I think it's time we say Hey man let me do it for myself. You know if I'm a writer let me look at my own way of writing that people did it.

Speaker 10 00:15:48.370
You know this holds where he writes you know the way he did his thing with the guy in Africa that he sent back in his home was a whole way a new way of doing things.

Speaker 15 00:15:58.450
You know a model Baraka you know might as well yes because you really reflect the perennial dilemma of the artist particularly the artist who has a political conscience. What I mean is that.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:16:14.260
On one hand the artist wants to be himself and reflect himself in a way in which he perceives society on the other hand artist being sensitive people recognize the wrongs in society even though they may not want to say them that way.

Speaker 15 00:16:27.230
Okay. And motivated to try to do something about it. And the real question that's what I said the dilemma dilemma. You know you can be right or wrong. The dilemma is how do you go. How much politics do you put in your writing. How much politics do you do in your life. For example Jane Fonda an actress she has become overtly political. Some people in the acting professional services is never a good thing. JANE FONDA ACTRESS You ought to do whatever she wants to do through her writing. She says I'm a person and as a person this is the way I feel about these particular situations. And I have a little visibility a little money and I should use this film about visibility to speak my mind. On the other hand some serious politicians say well what is an actress doing in politics. He doesn't know anything about politics so that's really the dilemma. The confusion that goes on between the actor between the artist in terms of his politics and his art.

Speaker 19 00:17:27.670.0000000001164
Yes like I'm in LA. Brothers tell me Well you know if you're not as you shouldn't feel right or whatever you are you shouldn't be involved in politics you know or any kind of. To me I just feel that the involvement of an artist in politics should be dictated by his conscience.

Speaker 16 00:17:44.870
You know as it is it is. If his gut tells him that he should be involved in politics up to the till then he should do it you know because he's making a decision for himself. If he says what I should only be at this point then he should be at that point. But it should be you know the art is right to choose for himself.

Speaker 17 00:18:07.210
That's true with the world too with all people with all people you know the true and of course that one of the things that comes through in your writing just the humanity of the the respect for the humanity of people. And I guess ideally if the world were built around a whole circle of respect for each other we wouldn't have all of the things that are happening in terms of the various oppressions that exist in our society. Well let's talk a little bit about how writers like yourself are both develop your skills and also contribute to the development of the skills of others. I believe you have a writers workshop. I think you're working with some young Puerto Rican brothers and sisters who are interested in writing. I believe in your background. Some writers work with you and help you along. What about when you say no. You do that. You never do anything all yourself but basically in terms of the organized work you're right he didn't come out of an organized Writers Workshop yet on the other hand. I believe I am correct in saying that you are working or intend to work with some young Puerto Rican brothers. So let me. My writing came I guess because where it is comes through the influence of people like Malmo better yet three to or it than other crews you know. So for all these you know reading these people that inspired me to write. Oh yeah I'm working now with a group called a young family which is. Where we had the family which is doing short eyes and we had a young family which is ages from 14 to 18. And they're not writers to actors and we have a thing where I I wrote some poetry and some monologues and some vignettes and I put them together and then linked them all through improvisations. And you have to play and this is what we do now. So we hope to do a full length play in the fall. So right now we're just working on that and I feel like they're getting all the technical things about acting and also theatre the golden lights still on track you know staging and everything everything that we can give them. Anybody that comes down you know regardless of what he is or what he does. You know we welcome his help. How do you recruit. Or is this sort of self generated. The folk who are interested sort of find you or locate you is a place where people can contact you.

Speaker 19 00:20:44.020
Yeah. Um well the Young family is located at the Puerto Rican Writers Actors Workshop in a forest place and the families look at it Riverside church with your eyes as first honor at.

Speaker 10 00:21:00.810
The young family with a look at it on they novel. We're doing state with tour in the play that we're doing a stage show with tour in it we're doing it as second street to 14. Second I think it is. And in this way and then on smaller. And then we're going to go to I think is our my role. Could the master prison they going to benefit Hill State Prison for Women and so forth. Well these are young brothers sisters who we feel that are this kind of theater. It's the same kind of theater the mother Phyllis Camellia the director of shot has taught me and what it's all about and which is you know given putting actors kids who like he's never been as they don't know go to school they're the ones that use houses and attention homes to members of gangs and they know they don't know what acting is all about where you put them in a situation it's terrible. This is what it's about you know and this is your life and you just reflect it give it to me and I'll do it. And then as they do it you know it helps to develop a sense of technique and acting skills. And when we do have a full length play they'll have it all together to have it down pat.

Speaker 17 00:22:19.540
Well there are a lot of opportunities though for young people to explore their own feelings through acting as a whole feel of what they call psychodrama where they're actually in an organized fashion say Well let's explore how you feel by drama now what are it appears that you and many of the neighborhood groups are doing is to say well look here's an area we haven't really thought about very much in terms of looking at our life and our reality let's use this particular medium the medium of the theater to do this but then this runs you headlong into the money problem.

Speaker 20 00:22:52.930
It's true that a neighborhood theater you don't need to spend a great deal of money but still you need money now. How do you actually go about developing something like this. Where have you been able to interest various funding sources the community groups pay for it young people pay for it themselves.

Speaker 19 00:23:07.610
Well right now we haven't been able to get any help at all as far as funding like most of the group is being supported on my salary alone if I've made out a shot as you know. So I'm supporting the whole group. See the thing is that I would not establish we don't have lack of big names and stuff like that. We're just a small Puerto Rican group.

Speaker 21 00:23:32.360
You know some obscure street you know doing some shows for those people. So we're not we don't get all that kind of help. I guess you know maybe in the future we're going to start you know we ever get it. We'll try to incorporate some of that and try to get some funding somehow. Oh we hope that maybe we'll be able to get some more dates to give the kids a chance to do their show and there is some money behind it.

Speaker 20 00:23:59.440
I noticed that too the performances are going to be in prisons. Is that to both give the prisoners an opportunity to interact with drama groups and at the same time give the young folks within the company a chance to know more about what's happening in the society in the prison.

Speaker 13 00:24:17.020
It's something that it's a combination of both. Also I think to let the brothers know that there's young people out there doing something you know like that's not the young families. That's not its main concern to go to the prison Alcazar is to go to the youth houses to go to the detention homes.

Speaker 21 00:24:30.850
The hope you know for what they call rehabilitation also work with boys in training schools for boys you know with up there the only entertainment they get is green grass granny and a chocolate band.

Speaker 16 00:24:43.240
You know these kids are from special status in Harlem and Laurel and you know we well we want to bring up something with their own their own peers doing something that tells them hey this is you member. And to get together how much tell you get.

Speaker 17 00:24:59.950
We've got a couple of minutes Uh actually yeah. As you developing that very beautifully in terms of what you're trying to do through a little family. It's both development for the young folks who are in the group. It's also development and projection for the audiences that view the play.

Speaker 7 00:25:17.990
What we ought to like in the movie ought to use houses and State Training School. Will serve as a role model for kids in there.

Speaker 12 00:25:27.430
Yeah that's the that's the other part of it. Hey look here's something you can do when you come out. You can try some of these things and uh I get what you're saying hey you don't have to be an actor but there's also many other things that you can. You know related to the theater and I not know that not just relates to the theater but other things you can do in life that they're the oppression and repression that you have experience.

Speaker 20 00:25:52.480
Is it something that has to stick with you the rest of your life. And what that really is a very important thing and of course the other thing I notice is what I call the circle that you have been successful successful playwright. Are you getting some benefits some rewards from it and you're turning some of these rewards back into your community. Yeah well you can't keep unless you give it away.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:26:14.530
Well that's very very true. Unfortunately not enough people know that. The other point of course is that just through exposure on programs such as sole reason that more people hear about what you're trying to do because sometimes you see a great place you play right. He's great right play. But behind that is a motivation for what you're trying to do in a way in which the true way in which you live your life and do things for other people that tends to expand.

Speaker 7 00:26:40.570
Yes like I'm still a little 68 and having it be you know that makes it a lot. You know and people tell me I should be living uptown so you know. That's not what that meant you know my people live on Sixth Street and that's where you want to live. Yeah.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:26:54.910
And by the way do you plan to. I know you're busy with the family the little family et cetera. Have you thought about uh some additional work on your own in terms of things that you want to do. Yeah I wanna do some acting like this what's behind every playwright you want. Well do you have any possibilities in the near future.

Speaker 10 00:27:17.080
Yeah. I think as a tape for others. You know I'm not a revolutionary.

Speaker 12 00:27:26.250
Hey you said it earlier that one of the best ways to develop one's I think tactics and techniques is to act what you've been living. Yeah go ahead be yourself. That's our job to be an actor.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:39.290
McAlpin Yara has been our guest on night soul of reason and we've been talking about the themes and the insights behind his play shot eyes which is at the Vivian Beaumont Theater in Lincoln Center and is appearing now. We've also talked about his work with the little family. A group of young Puerto Rican brothers and sisters who are working to help explore their talents and their reality through the theater. Thanks for to Miguel and Yara for being I guess my sole reason.

Speaker 22 00:28:07.590
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of that for one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in collaboration with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

