Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:28:10.572
O This is "Soul of Reason", a program which explores the thinking of Black America. How are Blacks responding to the social aesthetic and political concerns of today's world. Each week on this station we will examine what's happening among Black New Yorkers. I'm Roscoe Brown adjunct professor at New York University and President of Bronx Community College of the City University. Tonight on "Soul of Reason" our guests are Henry Lenoir who's group vice president of the YMCA of Greater New York and Livingston Francis Executive Director of the Harlem YMCA. And we're glad to have you gentlemen with us this evening. You The reason why you're here not only because you are outstanding men in the community both in Harlem and New York in general is that on September 30th the Harlem YMCA is running a dinner to honor a Secretary of War, Clifford Alexander, who is a Harlemite and former Harlemite. And also to raise funds for the great programs at the Harlem Y. And Henry Lenoir could you begin by telling us a little something about the background of the dinner and exactly why you're honoring Cliff Alexander and what's going to happen then?

Henry Lenoir 00:01:13.020
Clifford L. Alexander Junior is Secretary of the Army appointed by President Carter in February of this year. It represents the kind of model that we like to exhibit for our Harlem Youth. He grew up in Harlem, born in Harlem, went to school in Harlem. His parents still live in Harlem. He is married to the daughter of the late Dr. Arthur Logan. We all know that that family and what it represents in not only Harlem but New York and his father, Clifford Alexander, was the first manager of The New York Bank for Savings at a hundred and thirty fifth and and Lenox Avenue in Harlem. So they are well known and we like for our youth to see that Harlemites, people who are native Harlemites and made good. We like to show models to sort of offset the Superfly image that it is so evident in our community. So we're bringing Clifford Alexander here and testimonial and a testimonial dinner at New York Hilton Hotel September 30th. Tickets are available at Harlem YMCA. We have excellent leadership in that Lee Archer,[a] General Foods executive, and Arthur Quinn, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of The New York Bank for Savings, are co-chairmen of the event. We're anticipating a delightful evening. There will be many youth in attendance. So aside from the fund raising I think the primary interest is to bring this young man back to New York to show the youth of Harlem that as he did it they can also do it.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:03:14.500
I believe you've had several successful dinners in the past honoring other people from the Harlem community and from the New York community

Henry Lenoir 00:03:21.131
[unintelligible]. As we have a Black Achievers Dinner which is being done in March of next year. This will be the eighth annual Black Achievers Dinner. And this is also to the purpose is also to show models of Black people who have made it in industry who occupy a supervisory, managerial or professional positions in industry. Last year we had a hundred and fifteen companies, industries who sent in Black Achievers. We honor them at a dinner at the New York Hilton hotel also. Now next year in March that will be the eighth annual Black Achievers Dinner. And the co-chairmen for this event are John Larson, Vice Chairman of the board of The Bowery Savings Bank and Mrs. Carey Terrell who is a prominent civic worker in Harlem and a member of the Harlem YMCA board of managers.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:04:29.260
Well you must keep very busy between all of these testimonials and fundraising. How do you get them to do well?

Henry Lenoir 00:04:36.120
Well we we have we have we are turning that over to Livingston Frances now who is going to be the who is the new executive in Harlem and I'm sure that he will be successful not only in promoting these events but in creating the kind of program that we want in Harlem.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:05:01.730
Well actually the Harlem YMCA on a hundred, west 135th street is one of the most revered social agencies in Harlem that the Schomburg I guess and a few of the churches the well-known churches were around in Harlem. And at a time when there was not much opportunity for Blacks to go in other parts of the city and participate in the social and political life of the city The Harlem YMCA was really the center of life in Harlem. Many of us who didn't grew up in New York knew that when it came to New York at that time that the Harlem Y would be home and that we would be received graciously and that there would be a tremendous amount to do at the Harlem Y. We know the late Jackie Robinson, for example, spent a lot of time at the Harlem Y particularly boys division. Roy Campanella and just so many of the Blacks of that particular time. As racial integration and has hit our city --I shouldn't say hit our city --has become more apparent and more effective up to a certain point in our city. And as there's been sort of a diaspora of Blacks throughout the overall metropolitan area the Harlem Y has ceased to be just totally the focus of life in the Black community. And it certainly has brought about some attended membership and financial and program problems. Livingston Francis is a person who has been active in social work and social organizations in the city for many years. It's really interesting to see that you've taken up another challenge as one might say yet another challenge. It's almost like myself and taking up another challenge as President of Bronx Community College.

Livingston Francis 00:06:55.610
Yes and we'd like to congratulate you on that assignment because we know that it's a major role that has to be performed in the city and I can't think of a better person to be in that spot. So our congratulations to you.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:07:11.401
Thank you very very much. I'll be counting on you for all the help you can give us. Well I'm sure we'll need it.

Livingston Francis 00:07:16.711
Let me give you right to give that right back to you because we'll be counting on your help as we move into the Y in Harlem. And accept what you have characterized as a challenge. I see it as an exciting challenge. I agree with you that the Y over the years has been the major social institution for the Black community and in many ways has represented a significant instrument establishment in the entire Black community of New York City not alone Harlem.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:07:53.660
Well that's certainly true because if we look at the history of Blacks in New York City it is certainly true that Harlem has been not only the capital of Black New Yorkers but has been the capital of Black America and quite possibly the capital of Blacks all over the world because if you travel throughout the country or even South America you'll find Club Harlem or you'll find the Harlem social club. This really reflects the fact that Harlem is identified with some type of uplift of Blacks in the Western world. As comes probably out of the Harlem Renaissance out of the time and Harlem really was one of the places to be. In many instances still is the place to be because unlike what many people think most Blacks do not live in Harlem anymore. The borough of Brooklyn, the Bedford Stuyvesant area in particular, has more Black residents than Harlem. Harlem is still a place that we focus on because of its cultural institutions like the Schomburg and like the Harlem Y and like the Apollo Theater. But one of the things that's happened as Blacks have spread throughout the metropolitan area is that the support for some of its indigenous institutions with the possible exception of its churches has declined somewhat.

Henry Lenoir 00:09:12.670
May I say that I have served in four major Black YMCAs as Executive Director in Cincinnati and Dallas Texas and St.Louis and New York. There was a time when the Black YMCA was all things to all people. As you say that time is gone. If you wanted a kind of decent room you had to live it the Y. If you wanted a meal you had to eat at the YMCA.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:09:43.660
Wanted a the placed a meet for political purposes you [crosstalk]

Henry Lenoir 00:09:46.372
NAACP,. all of those agencies and groups met at the YMCA. That is no longer true. And if you wanted to serve on a board or a committee the Y gave that opportunity. Now it's no longer true. If you note downtown when The African Methodist Episcopal convention is in town, I mean you see the people around the Americana, The New York Hilton and that sort of thing. They used to be in the Black community and they used to be served at the YMCA. But as you say that's no longer true.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:10:26.110
And of course that's the reason why you have a challenge Livingston Frances to pick up this long heritage and in a sense revitalize it. And of course there are many programs that the Harlem Y has been running in the YMCA throughout the city has been running. Programs for ex offenders, programs for people who have drug concerns ,programs for youth, programs for people want to get basic education. The problem is that as your profile diminishes because of the competition not as many people hear about your services and that as many people contribute to them. For example at one time the Y was considered to be a place where one went for physical activity and you join sort of a health club and the like. Well now there's so many competing in the health clubs right now that you don't need a Y just for health purposes.

Livingston Francis 00:11:19.971
Well Roscoe

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:11:20.231
Tell us what you really would like to explore in terms of expanding the programs of the Harlem Y?

Livingston Francis 00:11:28.310
Yeah I think that one of the chief functions that Harlem Y can perform in the future is to provide the basis of leadership in a changing environment. I think you are very much on target when you talk about some of the programs that the Y was notorious for over the years and now the

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:11:52.121
When you say notorious but you mean notorious in the positive sense. [laugh]

Livingston Francis 00:11:55.340
Yes very positive. I hope so.[laugh] Absolutely. But now that there are other competing organizations in the community I think that the long history that the Y has had in Harlem, the long history that it has had as a repository of Black culture, Black history in Harlem and New York City community can be converted to the type of leadership role that helps to identify new figures and new roles for people who may have been affiliated with the Y in years gone by. This I see as a very positive kind of thing for those young people who are now beginning to move into the mainstream of American life. The young people who will have to carry the Black history Black culture beyond this point in time. And it seems to me that the Y's program has to address that that issue. I think that in addition to some of the programs that we hopefully will be developing for youth we will try to mesh it with adult programs so that there is a coming together, if you will, of the young and the adult population of people greater understanding, greater communication greater activities together.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:13:18.430
Well one of the drawbacks I understand about Y's in general in low income communities although Harlem isn't totally a low income community because there are some very affluent people who live right down the street on a thirty fifth Street including Borough President Percy Sutton. But in communities where it tends not to be as high economic standard is the membership problem that it costs money to join the Y. I know personally I've been a volunteer at some of the Y's including Harlem Y in certain kind of programs. And one of the concerns was we can't get the people from the community to join because it costs money. At same time these are the very folks ought to join. How are you approaching that particular problem? Henry., I see you have

Henry Lenoir 00:14:01.725
a..... .We have. We have a membership of around twenty five hundred people. As you say adults pay a membership fee. They engage in the physical activities and the other programs at the YMCA. But the youth programs, youth do not pay. We eliminated the youth membership some years ago because we found that if we were going to serve the Harlem community we had to subsidize our youth memberships. If we had charged a fee there and then of course are our services would have been limited to those people who live in the more affluent apartments apartment buildings et cetera. But we decided that we would reach out create outreach centers and try to get the money from other sources to subsidize this program.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:15:04.580
And of course that one of the reasons for your testimonial dinner.

Henry Lenoir 00:15:08.141
That's one of the reasons [crosstalk] some of them are right.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:15:10.021
That's a very good point because as I said, I have had some experience some years ago with some of the Ys in the community. About the whole question of membership fees. At that time they would have them pay a quarter a week or 50 cents a week. But even that became a deterrent. [crosstalk] You're now saying the name any young still lives in the Harlem community [crosstalk] the money you elsewhere [crosstalk] walk to the Harlem Y and sign up .And all you have to do is sign up. [crosstalk] Right. I don't. In some agencies they haven't pay a dime or quarter just to have some investment but they don't have to pay anything.

Henry Lenoir 00:15:37.080
We choose to raise the money to subsidize the program. And we'd been rather successful in that some of the financial resources come from the Harlem community. But I'm pleased to say that we've gained a lot of support from the downtown community. As I mentioned before Mr. Quinn, [of] The New York Bank for Savings is co-chairman of this testimonial along with Lee Archer from General Foods. And we have had John Larson of The Bowery Bank for Savings as a co-chairman of the Black Achievers project. And we have had James Shapley, President of Time, as co-chairman of that event and also Walter Thomas who is now retired. He was a Vice Chairman of the board of Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company as a co-chairman of the event. Over those five years we have grossed, seven years rather, we have grossed around seven hundred thousand dollars on that project alone.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:16:49.190
Now in terms of what it takes to run the Harlem Y. How much money does it take to run the Harlem Y including its staff and its membership for the young young people etc?. Just off the top of now I know it's more than off to of your head, but a general figure let us say?

Livingston Francis 00:17:04.810
I think if we dealt with a figure approximately a million dollars in terms of all of the projects and operations we would be within the range of the actual expenditures that it takes to run the Y. Of course you know and Henry is a particularly smart about this that in recent years all social institutions have been hit very hard in terms of the amount of monies that they have available to run programs. So I am I visualize the difficult times ahead for the Y as well as many other institutions in the city financially. Some of the things that Henry has been talking about will help us to get over the difficulties to some extent and we have to do more. And while I'm on the subject I think that in terms of the role of the Harlem Y part of the fundraising activities that Henry was alluding to become part of the the role that the Harlem Y has to play in the Black community in terms of developing the kind of resources and the leadership that will be able to attract those resources into a Harlem community. We have not done well in fundraising as a as a race over the years. We understand now that it's becoming more and more important that we concentrate on trying to mobilize what we have to create the greatest amount of financial financial assets that we possibly can. We'll be looking forward to that challenge. I think that the Cliff Alexander testimonial dinner, as we've pointed out before, is one such activity that will move in that direction as well as the Black Achievers Dinner that will be held in March and has become a real classic in the Harlem Y's history.

Henry Lenoir 00:19:32.700
I want to mention though the help that we've gotten from Greater New York Fund especially the I The Greater New York Fund of New York City and the cooperation we've gotten from the many REITs who is the executive director for special allocations and and Joel Weber and helping us to expand our work. For instance we have an outreach center at a hundred and thirteenth and St. Nicholas right in the heart of a community that is rather depressed. For four years they funded that program. And we have another outreach center 152nd and 7th Avenue which is part of our drug prevention program. We have a drug prevention program involving about 350 youth. The purpose of the program is to show kids that there are alternatives. There are other ways. There are other means of doing things camping and tours educational tours tutoring etc. So that program has been in effect now for about seven years.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:20:52.821
Exactly how many youth do you feel you serve in any given year?

Henry Lenoir 00:20:56.780
in any given year in our sports activities and group program we service around 3000 youth a year.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:21:05.360
Now that's a lot. But on the other hand it's a little contrasted with the magnitude of demand in a place like Harlem. How do you feel about that now? It's true that there are other social organizations the Children's Aid Society the Boys Club the Boys Athletic League ,a whole range of other kinds of organizations the type of work that Bob McCall in the Harlem professionals do for their basketball program and a number of things. How how do you appraise your relative contribution to the youth of Harlem who need the services? And it's true you have a tremendous leadership role because you're part of a national organization. You have a large building and it can be seen everywhere. But it appeared to me that if I were a director this would be a problem. I would like to serve, if I were in your place Livy, I'd like to serve 10000 youth.. How do you how do you appraiser?. I know I'm putting you on the spot but that's part of ...

Livingston Francis 00:22:06.010
I was. I think it's an important question because I've grappled with this in my own mind as I enter this new phase of my career. And one of the things that occurs to me is that the Y, as I said before, represents a role of leadership in a group of community of institutions and organizations all serving youth and the adult population of the Harlem community. Consequently I believe that it becomes a cooperative effort. And the problem if we can characterize it as a problem for a moment is one which has to be solved by all the social institutions operating in that community. Therefore it seems to me that the Y should take leadership in trying to coordinate the services that are available for youth to make certain that the masses are served as opposed to merely the 3000 or 4000 hopefully 5000 next year that are served at the Y. Obviously one institution can't do it. But if institutions collaborate with each other if we cooperate together and I certainly have every intention of helping the board to integrate their activities with other organizations in the community other boards in the community so that we have some sense of how we can reach as many youngsters as we possibly can. But I agree with you that it becomes frustrating when you hear the numbers and realize the multitude of people who need service and realize that you're not able to provide service to all. But I think that this is one of the approaches that can be used.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:24:03.800
Having come from a previous responsibility which involves coordination at The Community Council of Greater New York I could imagine that you would take that particular approach. But let's probe a little bit further. What would you consider to be the type of activities or the type of roles that the Harlem Y can best fulfill? For example, everybody goes for athletics. That's highly visible in the Black community. It works off a certain amount of energy. But there are other things in the arts and performance and socio-political activity things of this type that might have some other impact. Certainly your drug prevention program is good but we all know if we've studied these drug prevention programs that we're really lucky in many instances if we really take the kids out of it because there's so many countervailing forces that the impact upon youth So I am really asking you sort of a concept question

Livingston Francis 00:25:04.481
Right.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:25:04.901
Which I'm sure your board of directors has asked you and if they haven't they will be asking you.

Livingston Francis 00:25:09.730
Oh indeed they have but I'm My my my feeling is that programs should be developed in response to social conditions .And as we know there's sort of a dynamic character about the social conditions and particularly in these times. Therefore it seems to me that the board with staff direction has to examine very carefully those issues which are most pressing in the Harlem community today. And after itemizing those issues to begin to reflect on the kinds of programs that can best meet the need. Let me just mention a few things that are uppermost in my mind and I hope to be able to present to the board. We're all aware of the fact that unemployment and underemployment in New York City in the Black community is at the highest level that it has ever been. Part of that is due primarily to the fact that very few people have developed the kind of skills that are being called for today in the marketplace. I think that we will be exploring how the Y can make a contribution in this area, whether or not we can develop programs that focus on upward mobility that begin to wet the appetite of our youngsters. And by youngsters I'm talking about those persons who are not only teenagers but people in the young adult category

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:26:51.550
Because it is the Young Men's

Livingston Francis 00:26:53.610
It's the Young Men's But I want to make a point here that in spite of the fact that is the Young Men's [crosstalk] who's going to be very interested in the young women as well. As a matter of fact we have in place right now several programs that focus on young women. So that as an example the the whole question of skills development upward mobility, and as you pointed out, some of the programs in the arts and culture would be some of the directions that we would be looking at as well as many of the good programs that we already have in place. Then there is also the question of trying to determine whether a program is best suited for the Y as opposed to another institution or organization within the community. And in those instances where we find that a program may be better discharged in another agency we will be trying to take a look at that agency to see whether or not we can house it there. The fact that the program is needed is sort of academic but where it's discharged, where it's implemented becomes a question and I will be exploring that.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:28:05.650
What about the providing opportunities for youth to be their own leaders?

Livingston Francis 00:28:10.411
Oh AbsolutelyOne of criticisms of the social agencies is that we adults try to determine what youth to do. Do you have any plans to really let the youth thought that make some mistakes? I'm delighted you asked that.To do some learning in that that area?

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:28:24.341
Last night I sat down and was thinking out some notions that I'd like to present to the board and one of the things that it occurred to me was the fact that when we develop a program committee that program committee will have youth on it so that they have input in terms of decisions that are going to be made. And I would certainly hope that they'd be able to lead their own groups.

Livingston Francis 00:28:47.381
They certainly will. As a matter of fact I hope just to backtrack a little bit. I hope to be calling on persons like yourself who've volunteered in the past and who've had a long history come back to the Y and help me in this effort.

Dr.  Roscoe Brown 00:29:03.100
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" have been Henry Lenoir who's Group Vice President of the YMCA of Greater New York and Livingston Francis who is Executive Director of the Harlem YMCA. And we've been talking about the excellent programs that exist at the Harlem YMCA and the importance of this social agency. On September 30th at the New York Hilton there will be a testimonial to the Secretary of Defense, pardon me. Secretary of the Army, Clifford Alexander, who is a Harlemite. Persons interested in obtaining tickets or information about this testimonial should call 2 8 6 0 7 hundred. That's 2 8 6 0 7 hundred for information about the Harlem YMCA testimonial on September 30th the Secretary of the Army, Clifford Alexander. This Roscoe Brown for "Soul of Reason " saying so long. " Soul of Reason" is produced by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University in association with this station.

