Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:00:01.800
Close to 2000 Black artists, educators, and interested patrons of the arts are affiliated with the National Conference of Artists. Here, Dr. Ademola Olugebefola, vice president of the National Board of Directors, and Jean Taylor, executive secretary of the National Board of Directors of the National Conference of Artists, discuss their forthcoming conference on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper intro 00:00:26.072
[intro music begins] This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr, director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. [intro music ends]

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:01:13.430
Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" are two very important people affiliated with the National Conference of Artists: Dr. Ademola Olugebefola, who's vice president of the National Board and JeanTaylor who is executive secretary. And we're really glad to have you both with us tonight to talk about your upcoming conference. I understand that you have some thousand people or more who you expect to descend on New York City and particularly the Loeb Center at New York University, somewhere around April 5th through the 8th. So possibly, Jean, you might begin by-- well possibly maybe Ademola, since you have been around since the organization has been established-- maybe you could tell us something about the establishment of the National Conference of Artists and Jean, you can tell us something about what's being planned on the conference.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:02:04.650
Well actually, the organization was around long before I was cognizant of what was happening, because the organization is 19 years old now.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:02:14.540
Oh, it's quite a long time.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:02:16.191
Yeah, it began in 1959 at Atlanta University and it was organized by two very distinguished senior artists, Mr. John Parks and Miss Margaret Burrows from Chicago. And the purpose in the formation of the organization at that point was to bring together African-American artists, as well as persons of all races interested in art by African-Americans. And they felt that, in by unifying the forces, it would advance the purposes and impact that was so necessary for the advancement of Black art in this country.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:02:52.520
It's interesting that this occurred nineteen years ago. And as you well know, that there's been Black art going all the way back into the 19th and even 18th centuries, but it's only recently that Black artists have gotten, sort of, national exposure. People like Romare Bearden and Jacob Lawrence and Richard [last name], Hale Woodruff, they've been just recently getting the exposure nationally that many of them have had for years inside the Black artistic community. And it's interesting that you mention Atlanta, because Hale Woodruff who was once a colleague of mine at New York University, and is still active in painting, did much of his original work and painting and studying at Atlanta University, before coming to New York University.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:03:39.610
Well, you know, without a doubt, Hale is one of the pioneers. In fact, I believe back in 1941, he was organizing Black artists at that point. The National Conference-- the significance of the National Conference-- was this was the first national body to come together, but certainly Hale was doing that many, many years ago.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:03:57.560
Now, Jean, can you tell us a little something about this conference? It reminds me of sort of a mini FESTAC, and for those in the audience who are not familiar with what we're talking about, there is the African Cultural Arts Festival which is going on right now in Nigeria, and has brought together literally thousands of Black writers, poets, dancers, musicians from all over the world. And what you folks propose to do is to bring about a thousand or so Black artists to New York City. And because of our interest and our cooperation, the Loeb Student Center at New York University will be the place where you emanate from, although most of the work will be at the various galleries, particularly Studio Museum in Harlem. So could you tell us a little bit more about what's planned, when the conference begins, and how people who are interested can become involved.

Jean Taylor 00:04:51.320
OK, we certainly are very, very excited about the conference coming to New York. First of all, there's so many kinds of events that are taking place. The dates are Tuesday April 5th through Friday April 8th, and on the first day, there will be registration down at Loeb Center at NYU. Now the opening session will take place at the Harlem State Office Building, that's at West 125th Street. And at our opening session, we will have Dr. John Henry Clark, who will speak on the Art and the Black artist as a historian. And Dr. Clark has spoken at the first regional conference that we had at City College, and he's one of our most, what should I say--

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:05:49.220
illustrious

Jean Taylor 00:05:49.881
--illustrious persons that we do have and is very interested in what NCA is doing. Also that day, we will have our regional meetings and those are meetings that will be scheduled for regions around the country. We have, I guess, basically five regions in which the artists will be coming together, discussing the projects that they have been doing during the year, and the coordinator of regions is E.J. Montgomery from California. There's also two seminars which will take place that evening, that's "Artists Into Action" and "Symbolism and Images." And basically those seminars-- the first one "Artists Into Action" will take place at, also the state office building. This will deal primarily with the artists movement around the country. What artists are doing from the east, the west coast, the south, and the midwest and northwest. I don't want to go, I guess, too much in detail--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:06:54.050
All right, well let me just raise a couple of questions. Obviously, most of the people who will be attending will be your members, will be the educators, art educators, artists, patrons of the art. This program, as you know, covers a wide part of the eastern seaboard including the New York metropolitan area, and possibly some of the listeners might be interested in attending. Do you encourage people who are not members of the conference to attend, and if you do encourage them, how do they make contact?

Jean Taylor 00:07:26.530
Certainly, we do, because we feel that the program is vital not only to visual artists, but to interested art patrons as well. And also, we do, we will have a very large student group coming from all over the country. So that, for further information, they can write to the National Conference of Artists, post office box 924, New York 127, or they may call 212- 864-7147.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:08:00.861
All right, could you give a number again please?

00:08:02.781
Yes, it's area code 212, here in New York, 864 - 7147.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:08:09.401
And that's for information about the National Conference of Artists' annual meeting which will be from April 5th through April 8th here in New York City. Now one of the things that we were talking about for the program, was whether people have a chance to see some Black art. And I believe, Ademola, you can tell us something about that.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:08:33.169.9999999999418
Well, I know we have a major exhibition taking place at the Studio Museum in Harlem, which is one of our major museums-- Black museums-- in the country, for that matter. And we are presently planning several smaller exhibitions at private galleries around the city, for one Benin Gallery will be holding a special exhibition. And Jean maybe you are familiar with a few others.

Jean Taylor 00:08:56.450
Well, what we are trying to do now is, a list is being made of artists-- Black artists-- that will be exhibiting in museums or galleries at that time. Further information can be gotten either by writing to or calling that number.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:09:14.760
So, in other words, we'll have several formal exhibitions sponsored by NCA and then of course, we'll be spotlighting any Black artists who are showing in the city- we will be drawing attention to them.

Jean Taylor 00:09:23.840
Oh also, this is very important because we mentioned Hale Woodruff, we have Miss Bettina Hunter that is working on coordinating an exhibit of his work to open--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:09:37.132
Yeah, I believe Hale mentioned that I was at our Institute's office where we have one of his prominent pieces displayed and he was telling me that they were going to put this exhibit together. And I think that's really fantastic, because Hale Woodruff is a pioneer in Black art and his work is really symbolic of what we stand for. As you develop this conference and the various sessions come about, what is the balance between business and social, political considerations, and just what you might call purely artistic consideration, recognizing that business and politics are involved in all art? But still, there are certain times when you focus more on the business and the political considerations, and there are certain times that you focus more on themes and media and various artistic considerations.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:10:27.201
Well, we think the conference will be a healthy combination of all of those aspects. We are certainly very concerned with the economic plight of the artist here, specifically the Black artist, in the country. And we have making, we've been making moves to design programs and connect up with the proper sources that can begin to devise and implement economic progress for Black artists. So the conference will have several seminars on art and business, certainly marketing-- all of these areas-- and we'll be calling in distinguished individuals in the business world who will be working-- imparting information and guidance-- in those areas. Aesthetically, of course, needless to say, that will be a prominent point of the conference also, because we are concerned with establishing clear understandings about who we are at all times so that both of those are priorities, really.

Jean Taylor 00:11:24.830
I was going to say, in connection with that, we have a two-session seminar on proposal writing and fundraising which is, as Ademola has just said, important to all artists-- how to get grants, how to, you know, write applications for these, and this will be two sessions-- one in the morning one in the afternoon--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:11:46.521
What day is that on that's on?

Jean Taylor 00:11:47.960
That's on Friday, April the 8th.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:11:49.670
And where will that session be held?

Jean Taylor 00:11:51.320
That session will be held down at the Loeb Center at the top of the park. Both sessions will be held there.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:11:58.220
I see. So basically using NYU, the Loeb Student Center, as a sort of a headquarters where people can come in, they can check in, they can find out what's going on and then some of the meetings will be at the New York University Center. But some of them will be at the Studio Museum, the State Office building and, are you going to have anything at the Metropolitan Museum of Art?

Jean Taylor 00:12:16.322
Ah well, yes, hopefully. Right now, we haven't gotten a firm confirmation on our panel to be held there, and possibly a reception. But we do have confirmation for several workshops to be held at Pratt Institute. There's going to be a mural workshop in which the artists who wish to participate will be out at Pratt all day on Wednesday, April---

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:12:41.484
-Are they going to prepare a mural?

Jean Taylor 00:12:42.598
Yes-- [laughs]

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:12:42.603
Sounds like LeRoy Neiman in the Olympics. Every day you add something to your mural. We've had many artists on "Soul of Reason." I mean, we've mentioned people like Benny Andrews and Norman Lewis, and just any number of artists, Linda Bryant and her work at her gallery, Just Above Midtown gallery. And one of the things that the conversation always gets around to is the way in which art is supported in America, and then more specifically the way in which Black art is supported. One of the things that was pointed out is that, there has been a tendency recently to try to build art into new structures, into the budgets for new structures. For example, recently I believe we had someone on the program who was talking about a grant of about two hundred and fifty thousand dollars to the State Office building for sculpture. I think that was Andy Piggott who was talking about a grant for a sculpture in a State Office building. A number of the commercial buildings set aside a certain proportion of their budget for artists. To what extent has this really reached out beyond the localized things that the State Office building in Harlem-- to what extent has this new avenue for consumption and support of art reached out to the Black artistic community?

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:14:14.630
Well, that particular clause I was familiar with for a number of years-- it's been around for a number of years-- I think spotlight is just being placed on it and what it is, is I believe one percent of the total cost of any federal or state building, is supposed to be relegated for it. However it is not the law, it's a recommendation, and thereby it's at the discretion of the architect as to who he would choose. As far as Black artists participating in this, from my knowledge, it's been very minimal. And of course, this is following the trend of Black artists just being recognized period, which is one of the basic problems that we're grappling with at NCA. So, some inroads are being made as we become more knowledgeable about these things. Usually a lot of this type information is not available, especially to the Black artist, so we're the last ones to hear about it. But through our organization, we have inroads now so that we receive this information and we can act on it as a unified body. So, I'm hoping that as we proceed into the future, there'll be more and more opportunities for Black artists to get some of these commissions.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:15:19.950
Tonight on "Soul of Reason " we are talking with Dr. Ademola Olugebefola, who is vice president and Jean Taylor who is executive secretary of the National Conference of Artists and we're talking about Black art in general but very specifically, their forthcoming conference to be held at New York University and in New York City between April 5th and April 8th. Jean, as we were talking about the business aspect and the proposal aspect and the like, one of the things that I have observed is that artists in general tend to be supported by people who have lots of money, and maybe that's the way it's always been throughout time. On the other hand, I have a feeling and some of the people who appeared on the program have a feeling, that Black people in general and people of average income ought to really support art more. What do you think about that? What are some of the ways that the average listener, the average one of us, can support art, particularly by Black people?

Jean Taylor 00:16:22.370
Well, first of all I'd like to say, they can support us by coming to this conference [laughs]. That is one way, because I think the types of information and what we will be doing will not only be educational for artists, but to the whole Black community. Areas that we're dealing with are historical. I'm going back to the conference for a moment because I think it's important for us to know historical contributions of Black artists and this is one of the segments of the conference that we'll be dealing with. And this is important, I think, for students to know, for artists to know, and generally for the Black community, because many people in the Black community are not familiar with the contributions that artists have played in this country. I think that's important. And financially, we do have a segment on commercial markets and we do have people that are involved in commercial businesses, from greeting cards on to promotion of prints and, which means that Black art can be available to everyone---

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:17:39.445
Which raises the question-- during the conference will it be possible for people who want to acquire art to acquire it, to purchase some art?

Jean Taylor 00:17:46.330
Yes [laughs]--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:17:47.013
The artist in a sense is an entrepreneur, and almost always there's the opportunity for acquiring art. Again for our listeners' information, those who want to get further information about the conference, the annual meeting of the National Conference of Artists should contact the National Conference of Artists by writing box 924 New York 127 or calling area code 212-864-7147, 864-7147, for information about the conference of the National Conference of Artists. Ademola, you've just in the past few weeks recently returned from FESTAC in Nigeria, and some of us even though we might have liked to have gone, couldn't attend both because of travel arrangements and work schedules. Tells us something about what happened there and what some of your observations.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:18:45.380
Well, firstly I attended FESTAC, the abbreviation for the second World Festival of Black and African Arts and Culture, and it was a magnificent event. It was my first time visiting Africa, Nigeria to be very specific, and there's no way that I can begin to describe the tremendous influence and beautiful feelings that were part of that festival. Black people from every corner of Africa were there, from Europe, from the United Kingdom and Ireland, from Scandinavian countries, from the Caribbean, from South America, and Canada. And needless to say, it was a tremendous gathering. We were you able to witness it in four different venues in which the activity was taking place -- some of the most profound cultural performances, exhibitions. Just in general, people all coming together in the feeling of unity and to establish once and for all, the grandeur, greatness of African and Black culture. One very interesting part of the total conference-- the colloquium-- which lasted for approximately 13 days and that was very, very invigorating. We had scholars from every corner of the globe coming together to discuss new teaching methods. The straightening out of many historical myths and in general, just laying a foundation for future scholastic and educational moves towards educating Black people all over the world.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:20:32.090
One of the questions that I would have, knowing that there are literally thousands, tens of thousands of African languages, and knowing that basically there is French speaking Africa and English speaking Africa, how was the language problem handled? Was it like a U.N. simultaneous translation or did French people speak to the French people and English people speak to the English people?

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:20:54.096
They saw that the Nigerian government, who were the host of the festival, solved that by simply declaring that the official languages of the festival was English and French, and more or less everybody kind of fitted into that groove. There were interpretations when, for instance, doing a colloquium, when a dissertation or something was being spoken in English, she would be translating into French and vice versa. So there wasn't too much of a problem in that area. Usually with each contingent, there was some official who spoke either English or French.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:21:26.001
And I say in terms of the visual arts, were there many actually exhibits other than the exhibits that were indigenous to Nigeria?

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:21:35.580
Oh absolutely, it was an international forum there. You had exhibitions from all of the nations who participated. And I can proudly say that the Black American exhibition certainly stood as one of the finest.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:21:47.700
I had heard that Jacob Lawrence either was there or sent a major exhibit of his work.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:21:53.970
Well, he did send one piece--

00:21:56.234
That's not a major exhibit [laughs]

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:21:56.237
-and Romare Bearden had one there also. Mr. Critchlow was represented also. And you had a very good cross-section of--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:22:03.095
What about in areas other than the visual arts? I understand that one of the problems that did occur is that everyone stayed-- a lot of people stayed-- in what was known as FESTAC village which was somewhat outside of Lagos, which is the main city. And there was a real question of how do you get around and how do you juggle all of these things. How did that work?

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:22:25.350
Well let's see. Number one, I'd like to mention that the exhibit by the way, was comprised of a great number of NCA artists from all over the country. As far as the transportation, the Nigerian government-- must give special commendations-- went out of their way to make things as feasible as possible, and large buses were assigned to each contingent, and several smaller buses and cars. However, when you were dealing with 250 American people with, you know, six to seven buses, it got to be a little tricky. However, I will say that most people were able move around. Transportation was provided to the areas where activities were going on. Perhaps people did not move about as freely as they wanted, which was to get outside of Lagos and to some of the other cities in Nigeria, but certainly provisions were made for transportation. No question about that.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:23:17.412
What about themes? What are some of the main-- maybe Jean you might want to respond to this-- what are some of the main themes in contemporary Black art? We just heard from Ademola about African influence and concerns about affecting the Black experience. What are, today, the main themes in Black art? We know that eight years ago there was a lot of protest involved in some of the themes. Are there more attempts to reflect African heritage, or are there more attempts to let artists do their own thing in terms of whatever medium, or whatever message, or whatever feeling, because the artist doesn't necessarily have to have a message?

Jean Taylor 00:24:06.660
That's a loaded question [laughs]. That's why I was smiling because this is a question that--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:24:15.270
Is asked a lot

Jean Taylor 00:24:15.274
--[laughs] is asked a lot. And it seems to come up at every conference either as a part of a seminar or workshop, or in the gathering of artists when they meet, say, on the basis of five to six people, this is always one of the points of controversy. So, in order to answer your question, I would say that artists are dealing with-- maybe I could say-- three levels. And that's one of taking from our African tradition and incorporating that into our work. I think artists are very concerned about getting back to our roots and finding out more about our heritage. I also feel that, with that, we have a large segment of artists that are concerned about expressing themselves, and that's a very broad general statement. And, by doing that, they're also taking into consideration, I would imagine, being or being born in this country, being Western, and some may or may not want to deal with that, but that's also reality--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:25:42.210
In other words, what you really are saying, as I hear you, is that like any set of artists, Black artists reflect a wide range of cultural experience that has some roots in their basic origin, which is African and Afro-American. And in a sense, it's a loaded question, I recognize that when I ask it.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:26:02.841
And is one that has been going on for many years--

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:26:04.582
About any kind of art.

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:26:06.930
It's been a question since the so-called Negro Renaissance in the 20s as to what Black aesthetics are. So it is something that is being worked out and I think artists are becoming a little more broad-minded about the whole concept. The most rewarding thing I found in the years-- these current years-- is that more artists are becoming aware of themselves as Black people, and thereby would reflect at some point in their work, which is very significant.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:26:32.580
That's an interesting point because there are some artists-- Black artists-- who paint what they call the traditional motif, you know, showing pictures, events, and so on. At least as I view this, as a person who attempts to appreciate art, a Black artist doesn't have to do any one particular thing, so long as the Black artist reflects what he or she feels is a part of the experience and the emotion and the aesthetic that she wants to present. And in terms of dealing with this, most probably it will reflect some aspect of one's Black experience. One thing that we didn't mention is that at your conference, the National Conference of Artists' annual meeting, you will have some of the people who are talking about these very things. Romare Bearden, for example who is one of our most esteemed Black artists, will appear at the conference. And in terms of the media, Tony Brown, who is a producer of "Black Journal" for NET will also appear, and I'm sure many of the other people whom we've mentioned. For example, I noticed in one of your newsletters that Elizabeth Catlett had just completed a piece on Louis Armstrong in New Orleans, and--

Dr. Ademola Olugebefola 00:27:48.951
Like you mentioned. So, I think it's very important that someone coming to this conference should not feel that they're only going to be dealing with visual artists, even though that is the main theme. You're going to have artists and creators from all different disciplines because, one of the things that we're pushing, is the interaction between the visual sciences and all of the other medias. And so we will have a broad cross-section of creative people there which should be very invigorating.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr 00:28:13.110
Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" have been Dr. Ademola Olugebefola who is vice president of the National Board of Directors and Jean Taylor who is executive secretary at National Board of Directors of the National Conference of Artists, a 2000- person group of people dedicated to Black art. Anyone who is interested in getting information about their annual conference at New York University on April 5th through April 8th, should call area code 212-864-7147. Thanks again to both of you for being our guests on tonight's program.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:47.032
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason "with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. [ music starts] "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week. [music ends]

