Speaker 1 00:00:01.490
The Bedford Stuyvesant restoration corporation was founded in 1967 to assist economic development in Brooklyn's Bedford Stuyvesant section. Here Franklin Thomas president of the Bedford Stuyvesant restoration corporation discussed the accomplishments and problems of the corporation on tonight's soul of reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:40.121
This is Soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box. Soul of reason is produced by BW NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 1 00:01:07.190
Our guests on tonight soul of reason is Franklin Thomas who is president of the Bedford Stuyvesant restoration Corporation which is doing a fantastic job with economic development in Brooklyn's Bedford Stuyvesant section. Glad to have you with us tonight Frank.

Speaker 3 00:01:19.791
Thank you Roscoe. It's nice to be here.

Speaker 1 00:01:21.751
The corporation was founded in 1967 largely coming out of the the riots and the pressure and a concern of the white population in particular for the problems of the black population.

Speaker 3 00:01:35.271
Well really the future the inner city across America

Speaker 1 00:01:37.880
That's right because if the inner city didn't survive and that's something we hope some of those people in Congress recognize in relationship to this fiscal crisis the country won't survive. So could you tell us something about the corporation. What have you accomplished. How have you gone about working toward this objective.

Speaker 3 00:01:55.610
Well let me begin by describing the community in which we work for those people who may not know about Bedford Stuyvesant. It's an area in central Brooklyn about 650 square blocks 400000 people. About 85 percent of the population is black about 10 percent Puerto Rican and 5 percent white. It was characterized by all of the problems we've come to associate with any depressed urban community but included within that array of problem was really a core of people who cared a lot about that community and who'd lived there for a long time and who saw in it the potential for redevelopment. It was that body of attitude an opinion that I think encouraged a lot of people in 1966 after the riots to try and find some way of building on that base that strength that existed in the area and over the next decade or two changing that community from what it was then headed towards being into a positive exciting place to live work and raise your family.

Speaker 1 00:03:02.090
I think one thing that the audience would be interesting to note is that Brook has Bedford Stuyvesant area was one of the first areas to develop a sizable black middle class.

Speaker 3 00:03:11.180
That's correct and a large homeownership population which is at the root of that.

Speaker 1 00:03:15.591
One of the guests on one of our previous shows was the director of the week civil project.

Speaker 3 00:03:21.240
Well yes know operation has something to do well with one of the things we get into is the purchase of the old weeks for buildings and trying to preserve them until the weeks fill society with may not and others could get their financing together to renovate those buildings and make them the historic spot that they ought to be and in fact are in the history of free black people in central

Speaker 1 00:03:46.430
Goes back to 1830 its pre civil war war. So that there is I think we're trying to steps back that there has been a long history of black life substantial black life in the Bedford Stuyvesant section and the riots of 66 and 67 65

Speaker 3 00:04:02.742
65 yeah

Speaker 1 00:04:04.072
That really tore up Fulton street so to look like a bomb sky god area reflected some of the frustrations of some of the newer people who moved into the community with the economic conditions with which they faced

Speaker 3 00:04:15.922
No question and the fact that we had as of 65 more than 20 years of Federal Urban Renewal legislation on the books and billions of dollars literally been made available across the country and you could not find with the exception of some public housing units any evidence of that program's impact in central Brooklyn. This was a a prime concern for people who live there and who asked the question why stay and if not here then where do I go. And the effort that this corporation has been engaged in for the last eight years is an attempt really to bring together that body of attitude and opinion existing in the community with some outside resources both public and private in a concentrated attempt to reverse the cycle of decay that was happening in Bedford Stuyvesant. We are a private nonprofit corporation and we join together residents Manhattan type business people and government in this major effort at redevelopment. Now that just to describe briefly some of the the underlying philosophies we've had from the beginning and continue to have today they're really very simple. We've said that the process of redevelopment is itself an industry that ought to be tapped for the benefit of the people who live in a given area. Now in the past. Most efforts at redevelopment had centered on identifying the problem marshaling a lot of support to challenge government and other sources to address the problem. And if you were successful that success would be reflected in a governmental response that brought in let's say the issue was housing outside contractors and developers with appropriate subsidies and arrangements to build and provide the housing units those units then turned over to the local community as if to say OK we've met your need here and then we wondered why in a short time those buildings were in disrepair and disarray and the frustration that the providing entities had over well what can we do. We gave you what you said you wanted and you didn't take care of it. Our notion very simply was that the process of providing let's say housing was an industry that ought to be tapped. Therefore we wanted a local capacity to acquire land to develop sites to build the buildings to do the financing to buy the supplies and materials locally to employ local people and then to manage the buildings with local people so that the product was only one part of the benefit to be derived from the development activity. This necessarily meant that you go a little more slowly perhaps than might otherwise be available because you're not bringing in the H.R. ages or the life racks or others who are established contractors and saying go build instead you're trying really from the ground up to build not only the physical structure but a capacity and a turn of mind that says this is a product of my labor my intellect my effort and I care about it and it's significant for me and the generations of people who follow me.

Speaker 1 00:07:22.200
Now this cost money. And one of the questions I was running through my head as you were talking is where and how do you get the money to support an effort like this goodness sense as a self-help effort. Yet at the same time the black community does not really have a large amount of economic resource so they must be a funding mechanism that you had to develop in order to implement those plans.

Speaker 3 00:07:43.412
That's correct. The basic funding roughly two thirds of the dollars we use come from the federal government. And what we did with the late Senator Robert Kennedy and and Javits Senator Javits sponsored an amendment to the old Economic Opportunity Act called the special Impact Program. And the idea was to create a kind of one stop service center where you could go to a window at the federal government present a series of coordinated plans that were designed to reduce dependency to encourage economic development in a given geographic area. And if those plans made sense be able at that one window to get the necessary federal support to carry on the activities

Speaker 1 00:08:25.571
it seems to me just as a bystander it might increase the political machinations that would be involved in it because I can see if you go have to go to one place that if you aren't tuned in with the right politicians and fortunately you were with the two senators behind you you're going to catch a hard way to go.

Speaker 3 00:08:46.170
Well they're in the realities remain the realities. No question about that but I think it's fair to say that they're probably fewer political problems both that we've experienced directly and that the 40 some odd CDC is across the country who followed us into this program have experienced through this program mechanism than any other that I have any personal knowledge of. And the reasons are fairly simple the the program goals are reasonably clearly stated by the applying entity. The notion really is that the program should be designed locally and that you can't design it out of Washington. So the legislation is deliberately broad enough to allow the Lummi Indians in the state of Washington to develop a fisheries project to allow catfish farms to develop in rural Georgia and to allow the kinds of multiple phased programs we have in Bedford Stuyvesant to grow and develop.

Speaker 1 00:09:39.470
Now are these some of the programs that are now under challenge by the Ford administration. Is there a move on foot to cut back on these type of programs. Because I know there has been a move on foot to cut back on most social programs under these Ford Nixon

Speaker 3 00:09:54.911
I guess in the general rubric of social programs you'd say that they've. This program has received very close scrutiny by both the Nixon administration and the Ford administration. It's interesting to note that the funding level at the federal side has remained about the same for the past five years that is through the Nixon administration and into the Ford administration. The Federal Government has provided about 39 million dollars a year nationwide for this program.

Speaker 1 00:10:24.580
Thirty nine million.

Speaker 3 00:10:25.781
That's right. It's a relatively small amount of money nationwide.

Speaker 1 00:10:28.630
I think that too many aircraft airfreight.

Speaker 3 00:10:31.181
That's a fact. It also means that when you hear the challenges to the four or five billion dollar appropriation for social related type programs that this one is usually not specifically identified and it's been our experience that to the extent that we can isolate it and make known what that 39 million dollars has bought nationwide per year over the last seven or eight years that we've had substantial support both in the Congress and in the administration. We went through some difficult times but it's with the past administrations. But it's a it is a fact that our level of funding in Bedford Stuyvesant has increased during the Nixon years. It's somewhat ironic that that happened but it is a fact we started out at 7 million dollars for the first two years of our operation 67 through 69 we then went to about 10 million dollars for the ensuing two year period. We went to 13 million for the ensuing two years and went back to 11 and we're back to nine now. But in all instances what's happened is the base of entities being supported nationwide has increased and therefore the amount of dollars available to any one entity has decreased since the lid was on at roughly thirty nine million throughout this period.

Speaker 1 00:11:50.110
Well given the fact that your funding level you must have other sources because it takes a lot more 9 million dollars to build of housing

Speaker 3 00:11:56.772
We do

Speaker 1 00:11:57.132
Have you folks and we know a number built a number of housing units.

Speaker 3 00:12:00.730
That's correct. What we do with the basic federal grant and as I mentioned that reflects about two thirds of our operating budget each year the balance is provided by foundations and other private giving. That really is the seed money that we use to leverage money from banks insurance companies and the traditional sources of capital in the country. So that for any given physical development project whether it's housing or commercial activities shopping centers what have you. The major financing for those activities will be the traditional sources of capital city bank Chemical Bank Prudential Life Insurance the major companies who are involved in this kind of activity. We use our federal dollars to seed the project to provide the equity portion that we might have to put up. But generally we leverage out at better than two or three to one in terms of private versus public dollar.

Speaker 1 00:12:58.340
And this is consistent with the principle of trying to have the flow of money into the black community at least controlled by blacks or black corporations to identify with the aspirations of the black community in the projects that they want.

Speaker 3 00:13:13.030
I think that that's right. In addition it means that you can begin to have the capital circulate within the area in a way that has not been the practice for the last several decades. So that we'll get to talk I think on some of the specific projects we're into in a moment but that's one of the basic notions to get new capital in and keep it circulating within the area. So the spill off benefits can be felt by people who live in Bedford

Speaker 1 00:13:37.031
One of your major projects has been a shopping center project which has just opened I believe Atlanta what about

Speaker 3 00:13:42.911
Yes, October 2nd

Speaker 1 00:13:43.691
October 2nd and is bringing to the Bedford Stuyvesant community a new opportunity for economic and social progress tonight on soul of reason we are talking with Franklin Thomas as president of the Bedford Stuyvesant restoration Corporation. And we are talking about the role of the corporation in economic development of Bedford Stuyvesant section. And when we talk about that Frank maybe you could run down for the audience some of the specific projects you have completed some of the housing projects and as we said earlier this fantastic shopping center that has just opened right off of 42nd Street.

Speaker 3 00:14:19.420
I'll be happy to. We've we've really divided ourselves into three major groupings. One is physical development. The other is business development and the third are what we call cultural social community based programs in the physical development area. We do both preservation of housing that's in reasonably good shape in the area. We do renovation of abandoned buildings and we've done several hundred of those and we do the construction of new buildings and we've done three new apartment complexes and have two more underway at present in the economic development area what we do is to try and encourage national companies to consider locating plants and facilities in Bedford Stuyvesant to provide more job opportunities. The biggest success thus far is the IBM plant with over 400 jobs and 90 percent of the people who work there come from within a mile of the plant. And as you may have read more recently we are in the process of developing a site on which IBM will construct a new manufacturing facility. It's a 12 million dollar venture by IBM and ensures the continuity of those four to 500 jobs for several decades in Bedford Stuyvesant

Speaker 1 00:15:29.983
And I understand that the work they do is very very technical work work with some corporations say that there isn't enough manpower skilled manpower in the black community to do and the fact that they've been successful attest to the fact that yes given the opportunity black people can do anything.

Speaker 3 00:15:45.490
No question about it. IBM has been in Bed Stuy for the last five and a half years. They went from one product line which was a cable assembly operation. They now have four products coming out of that plant including power assembly equipment for which that unit is one of the few in the manufacturing division on the East Coast to provide. So it is an integral part of the IBM structure. The major second piece of the business development side is to encourage local people who want to go into business to get started. And there we've assisted about 125 local businesses to get started and they run the gamut from small shoe repair shops to major manufacturing companies a lot of small contractors and some larger contractors. And one of the perhaps best known businesses we've gotten started is called the design works of Bedford Stuyvesant and it both produces designs for major manufacturers that appear as the Baqouba collection of Martax division of West Point pepper owl as well as decorative fabrics for the home decorator market that Baqouba collection. Just parenthetically is perhaps the most successful designs that Martaxes ever had. We're now into our third series of designs for Martax and this one looks even more promising than the ones that have gone before it.

Speaker 1 00:17:05.170.00000000011642
Well as I hear you talk with all these projects going along I wonder about your role as president. Do you actually monitor each one of these projects or do you act as a catalyst. How do you function. Because just to be able to catalog them in your head requires a tremendous amount of ability.

Speaker 3 00:17:23.859.9999999998836
Well it helps to have been there from the beginning.

Speaker 1 00:17:25.151.00000000011642
That's true.

Speaker 3 00:17:26.240
It's all generic now for the I don't know how it would be where I coming in to try and get a handle on as many things as we do have going. But the largest role yes that I play is to encourage the staff. And it's a first class staff and to allow it to both take on the responsibility and have the authority to do the things that need doing and to keep that function of the staff in tune with the policy that's set by the board of directors.

Speaker 1 00:17:53.412
Who are some of the members of your board?

Speaker 3 00:17:55.360
J.B. Williams as chairman. Daphne Sheppard's on the board Cheryl Jones who's a doctor in Brooklyn Alvin who's a newly elected assemblyman from my area Carl Butler. Lucille Rose was on until recently Elmira Corsi. It's always risky to start naming them

Speaker 1 00:18:12.121
I just wanted just a sampling now

00:18:16.043
Oh Joli Owens and Maddie King and Rudy Clarence and I guess the others are friendly enough so that if I've forgotten their names at the moment

Speaker 1 00:18:27.431
I think the point is well taken. I'm sure that since you don't have a written material in front of you and you have so many board members that you can't really identify them all. But the main point is that you have some very highly respected citizen from the Bedford Stuyvesant community on your boards

Speaker 3 00:18:43.091
That's correct

Speaker 1 00:18:43.752
Assisting you in making these decisions

Speaker 3 00:18:45.461
And their counterpart from the business world Benno Schmidt Ethel Kennedy has been on the board since Bob's death. Bill Spencer city bank is on our board. Jack Blum Roswell go Patrick has been with us from the beginning. Bill Paley was on for a number years Andre Meyer a number of Douglas Dillon people who had a history of some success in business and finance.

Speaker 1 00:19:08.750
I would say those people had a history of a lot of success in business and finance

Speaker 3 00:19:12.110
And what's wonderful is that the we meet as a board together. We plan the programs together and we execute them together and we account for everything that we undertake to from a staff standpoint to the board and from a corporate standpoint to the community both locally and nationally on a regular basis. Let me just add one other thing to your initial question about the scope of our activities. One of the things that Bob Kennedy used to say when we were getting started was that we really had to find a way to as he put it grasp the Webb hole that is you could not and we should not get involved in simple business development or simple construction or maintenance of housing that there was a spirit that had to go along with it. And that spirit was anchored in the culture of a people and part of our effort ought to address itself towards the encouragement of the creative arts the recognition of talent the projection of that talent and the nurturing from a very early age of a sense both of personal identity and some identity with our community as a result. We devote a lion's share of our resources and our energy towards the Billie Holiday theater which is a legitimate theater operating in Bedford Stuyvesant towards the arts shows that go on roughly every two months with local artists being featured very prominently towards the creation of drum and bugle calls and steel bands and dance and grooming and you name it kinds of activities a lot of recreation that begin to intermix in a way that any healthy community must be intermeshed. Both its business side its cultural side and its its general sense of well-being we've also been in education for the last several years and the Medgar Evers College is in part an outgrowth of a study that we did in 1967 on the post high school opportunities for youngsters in and around central Brooklyn. I mentioned this because it hopefully gives you and anyone listening a a sense of the scope of concern the corporation has and I don't say we do everything that I've outlined well but we make a stab at each of those directions and I think the process of recognizing the importance of this kind of scope is something that we feel very proud of and we feel it's important to convey to others

Speaker 1 00:21:37.952
And I think your track record is particularly good. Beckley in the area of arts for children you have a puppet theater here.

Speaker 3 00:21:46.490
Yes that they line up on Saturday

Speaker 1 00:21:48.391
They lineup

Speaker 3 00:21:48.741
An hour before theater opens. To be certain they get seats

Speaker 1 00:21:52.014
Now physically where is your main base of operations and how does this relate to the shopping plaza you've developed.

Speaker 3 00:21:58.550
Our main base of operation is the old Sheffield farms building which was an abandoned dairy that we bought in 1968 and using local people renovated into a modern office building with a theater and that square block on Fulton Street between New York and Brooklyn Avenue and going through to her coma is now the core of a major shopping center that as I mentioned opened on October 2nd in that center we have roughly two hundred thousand square feet of space. We have major national companies learner's Lane Bryant Nathan's of Coney Island Baskin Robbins coward shoe interspersed with local clients or tenants two sides of the same high J.C. shell chic to Marieke all kinds of boutiques and operations happening in that center. We have each of the major utilities located there Brooklyn Union Gas Con Edison are in place already and open the telephone company will be coming in. We have a Social Security office there we have the offices of Fred Richman and Shirley Chisholm the congressional representatives. So that again we're trying to provide a downtown for Bedford Stuyvesant a place where people can come and take care of their business and personal needs in an atmosphere that is both exciting and a service that is sorely needed and has not been present in our community. This shopping center is owned by the non-profit development company. Each of the entities I've mentioned to you is a tenant in that complex. They will also be a path marked supermarket coming in a 24 hour supermarket 30000 square feet and from everything I can tell from the people who stop me on the street and those who come to the office and those who call this is a direction that has been needed and that people have wanted to see happen and we're just happy to be in it. The ground floor bring about the financing of it as is it to take 10 seconds to tell you about it it's kind of fascinating the way most shopping centers are built is that you go out and first sign up your major tenants and on the strength of those leases you're able to get your construction financing. Well we couldn't get any tenants to sign up four years ago on the basis of our dream of what could happen in the area. So instead we went and secured a loan guarantee from a foundation and went to the banks and got a construction loan built the center and then have attempted to lease it. And when we successfully leased we will then get the permanent financing pay off the bank loan and release the guarantee.

Speaker 1 00:24:30.041
It takes quite a bit Of machinations about it

Speaker 3 00:24:33.222
But it yet it can be done is the only pointThat's a point And that's the one I want to make.

Speaker 1 00:24:38.180
Well looking at that point you're talking about your success story and I think that what you've described as a success story the nation's economy has turned down turn down has affected blacks and Puerto Ricans other minorities more than most. The idea of black capitalism doesn't seem to be flying as high as it flew before. What do you think the future is for black economic development particularly in our inner cities. I think Bed Stuy restoration is sort of a jewel in the crown. First it's probably the best of these programs but given the overall economic climate of the country the overall political climate what do you think the future holds for black economic development.

Speaker 3 00:25:20.150
Well that's a hard one to answer. I think thatIf you knew the answer we wouldn't have the problem. In some ways the you have to look towards those kinds of businesses and activities for which there will always be a demand I think the second point I'd make in that relates to all the service related businesses food you name it because as long as there's any disposable income those items are going to be needed and the people who provide that service can still in effect be in an economic development mode.

Speaker 1 00:25:51.910
An interesting statistic I heard the other day is that time of economic turndown actually the food business improves

Speaker 3 00:25:58.481
That and you know there's some studies of Appalachia and other areas during times of great crisis including the Depression and one of the last items to go from the home was the radio or television so that there is a there is a phenomena that goes on on people's lifestyles of course to change that still results in their exposable or disposable income being targeted and given areas and I think there is a need now to focus more clearly on those. I think the second piece is that the redevelopment of both inner city areas and some suburban areas is going to be a national priority if not this year than in the next few years because there's just no way around it you're going to have to stimulate housing construction again and to be able to get in on the ground floor of that industry with the capacity to perform those functions is another channel of opportunity for

Speaker 1 00:26:54.461
And the development of skills in the black community to be able to do those things.

Speaker 3 00:26:57.730
Absolutely. That's that's my point. I think also that it's probably fair to say that the era of kind of guilt response has passed on the part of large blocks

Speaker 1 00:27:08.291
That's reflected in the political climate.

Speaker 3 00:27:09.761
That's correct. And I think there's a I think really other people are further along than the politicians tend to acknowledge or allowMost of the timeMost of the time and I think it's true in this case too. I think that as the racial lines break down the problems are seen to be more common to people based on economic level rather than race or sex whatever the case may be.

Speaker 1 00:27:31.240
So in a sense what you're saying is that there is a a possibly hopeful future particularly if we keep working.

Speaker 3 00:27:36.660
I think there's no question about that because if we don't regard it as such then we have to say our lives are over and I'm not prepared to say that.

Speaker 1 00:27:45.580
And of course that's the role of the Bedford Stuyvesant restoration Corporation our guest on tonight's sole reason has been Franklin Thomas is president of the Bedford Stuyvesant restoration corporation and we've been talking about the role of the corporation in the economic social and cultural development of the Bedford Stuyvesant area like to thank you Frank for being our guest on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 3 00:28:06.070
Thank you. Been a pleasure.

