Speaker 1 00:00:01.480
There are 20 100 black policemen and 500 black firemen in New York City. What are their special problems. How are their organizations working to alleviate them. What is the future for blacks in the police and fire departments. Here Sergeant James Hargrove president of the Guardians Association and Lieutenant Richard Harris president of the Vulcan Society discuss these questions on tonight's soul of reason. This is Soul of reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:49.680
A program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 3 00:01:14.290
With us this evening on soul of reason two gentlemen Lieutenant Richard Harris of the Vulcan Society which is the organization that represents black firemen in New York City. And Sergeant James Hargrove president of the Guardians Association which is the organization that represents black policemen in New York City. Glad to have you both with us tonight on solar reason. Glad to be here. Now I understand that there are about 8 percent of the police force in New York City is black and about 5 percent or thereabouts of the fire department in New York City is black. It would appear that black policemen and black firemen have special problems in New York City just like black people have special problems in other professions. Possibly we could begin by asking Sergeant Hargrove What are some of the special problems of black policemen.

Speaker 4 00:02:06.090
Well as black firemen there's just not enough of us is not enough at the entrance level and there's certainly not enough at disappearing losses level to bring about effective change in New York City Police Department as far as its policing policies of the city of New York which is quickly becoming a majority of minorities.

Speaker 5 00:02:28.870
We hire a few would be suggesting then that not only is there not a sufficient number of black policemen that they're not a sufficient number of Hispanic policemen and that a sufficient number of Chinese policemen as well. That's got a ransom minority groups that are now increasing other than just the number situation. Are there any other special problems that black policemen face.

Speaker 4 00:02:49.930
Very definitely. Once you're in a New York City Police Department then you have the battle of assignments. We also considered what I guess everybody would say that we are to lead a men in the middle. We are not accepted wholeheartedly by the establishment the white police officers and we're not accepted by our black counterparts. We have over and over again stood up in issues that affected the minority community realizing that we were born black and we will always be black and we can ill afford to say that we are a police officer first. They gave me a gun and a shield which they can take away to morrow and I'll still be black. And in New York City Police Department failed to recognize the problems of black community and effectively deal with it. So the dilemma is that we are in the middle.

Speaker 3 00:03:45.580
That's true with a number of social services in New York City and all other cities for black people. And I think your situation is aptly described Lieutenant Harris.

Speaker 6 00:03:57.340
What are some special problems that black firemen face in New York City right as Sergeant Hargrove pointed out black firemen had the same problem. The major problem is numbers we don't have enough of black firemen and black officers now by not having enough. The policies of the department do not reflect the community as we believe it should and it does not or does not respond to the community's needs. Okay.

Speaker 7 00:04:26.150
Could you give an example of how having more black firemen would change certain policies in the fire department.

Speaker 6 00:04:33.550
Right well well within the department before I addressed the problem of community within the department we have an assignment problem meaning that blacks are just very recently have been allowed to work in Rescue companies. They are unique units that men should be assigned to certain areas of the city. Blacks were never assigned so we had to fight to get them in. And we still don't have enough representation in the good companies. In addition we're not recognized for our acts of bravery. Many of our men have made outstanding rescues and the board has made up just does not have enough blacks represented. We have one top black official and he's alone among a couple of dozen superior officers. They have to sit down evaluate these are as you suggested awards that the awarding of citations for bravery as a political matter well not based on the facts. It's right it's subjective not political but very subjective and is as much as our white brothers like to say that they are objective in evaluating these things. They're not.

Speaker 7 00:05:41.760
That's really interesting because particularly in an area where you face death and injury it's amazing that two different people or two different boards would differ as to whether it's something it's meritorious if you tell me that these acts are patently meritorious on the act itself. And if the fact finding is adequately done and I really it's almost inconceivable that there would be racism in awarding citations for bravery.

Speaker 8 00:06:12.420
All right. Well I see it even starts at the beginning. The recognition of the act that has to be done by deputy chief and we have very few black deputy chiefs in fact we have a white deputy chief recognize it. That's right. Now it depends on that that white deputy chief to write you up otherwise you can make an outstanding act. And it's his discretion whether you're really written up for that act or not. So what happens often in fact happened very recently we had to I had to pursue it on behalf of the organization the recognition of a man who saved two of his officers a fireman he pulled out two lieutenants who were burnt at a fire in the Bronx and we had to pursue the deputy chief to make him write this man up and it was up to his discretion.

Speaker 7 00:06:58.500
I think that's something that's interesting for the public to know because this is similar to what happened to blacks in the various wars and getting recognized for their acts of bravery the fact that they were not submitted for Congressional Medals of Honor and things of this type. And in 1975 it's amazing that this occurs but I think it's important to bring this to the attention of the public so there can be some public pressure in dealing with this. Now you did mention that having more black firemen the fire department could be more responsive to the needs of the black community. Could you give an example of that.

Speaker 8 00:07:31.680
Well the whole area of community relations is that cedar fire houses the fire department. They do a good job of putting out fires in minority communities but after the fire is over there's additional work that has to be done. And our white brothers just don't recognize what is some of that additional work. Well you know just relating to the people who who've a person who has lost their lives today all of their belongings and not treating him as if you're doing him a favor and you know taking care of his property what used to happen is that that at a fire a person has only a sofa left and finding a standing on it and acts like that we want to do away with it and you don't have enough black officers or sensitive officers to make sure those things don't happen.

Speaker 9 00:08:16.680
Let me ask the question is this insensitivity randomly distributed in other words is this the way firemen in general operate because there is a lot of you know in jokes about what happens when a fireman you get inside of your house or is this something is just racially motivated that white firemen go out of their way to stand on the sofas of black people who have fires but don't stand on the as a white people have fires just a general insensitivity.

Speaker 8 00:08:43.380
Let us do as we versus not a general insensitivity but they go out of their way not to stand on white people's furniture because they empathize with them and they can identify with them.

Speaker 1 00:08:52.540
Now have these charges which are very direct and very clear been articulated to the leadership of the fire department to the mayor to the Human Rights Commission because I think these are very very serious charges you're really saying your fire department is racist and we'll come back to the police department and we'll deal with them in a moment. Have these charges really been aired. I know that's the type of thing your organization does. But where have they have been aired and what have been the responses to them.

Speaker 8 00:09:18.900
Well see during good times what we call before we had a crisis in the city they were aired. And Commissioner Hagan he was receptive to them as was his predecessor Commissioner Lowey who's black was Black Man and now they were receptive to it. So we established committee Relations Bureau. But when they cut back what they do is then they eliminate personnel from those bureaus. It becomes less a priority and just men have been laid off. We have lost black firemen. In 1973 we filed a suit and we won. And as a result of that suit you know charging discrimination in hiring policies the city and the fire department. And we got more black firefighters in black and Hispanic firefighters. But as a result of the of the fiscal crisis many of those men have been laid off. Many of our men have been forced to retire. So we have less blacks in the fire department now than we had even before the lawsuit.

Speaker 3 00:10:10.580
Well Sergeant Hargrove us talk about the police department. Aside from the specific examples of need for black policemen what does the Guardians Association try to do. What's your program. How you organized. How you doing.

Speaker 10 00:10:27.050
Well we're fighting a New York City Police Department and in my opinion is insensitive to minority communities in the city of New York. As we recognize in the criminal justice system that everyone does not get equal justice. Never do. Individuals and minority communities you see in New York get equal service. I'm talking about a normal police run that in Whitestone Queens you'll get a radio call in five minutes. And in Bedford stylus and you might get it in two hours and not at all.

Speaker 1 00:11:04.780
Is this because of the ratio or because men know work hard or what.

Speaker 11 00:11:09.110
Well they have their attitude and responding is not the same I would say that in a minority community gratitude is. I'll get there and the attitude and then you know another area is I better get there.

Speaker 1 00:11:26.890
Of course that could be monitored. I'm sure they must have computer records of how long it takes for calls to be answered. And if in fact you could present data that shows that there is a difference you would appear to me that you have a basis of a public charge of incompetence. Well have you ever charged your department in incompetence. There was and very legally and so on.

Speaker 10 00:11:47.990
And then many not legally in a court but internally within a department. The answer always come back that the workload and two areas a vast difference and not so much as the time that it takes for a also to respond to a particular job. But what type of job does he do once he gets there. I mean does he completely satisfy the customer that call him and I say he does not in the minority communities a lot of it is because he doesn't actually know what is needed.

Speaker 5 00:12:16.670
So sensitive to the needs of those people and unfortunately in many minority communities the crimes or the arguments or whatever you are between people of the same minority group and there might be some tendency not to respond to that because of that. Is that true.

Speaker 10 00:12:33.140
There is a great tendency to see white police officers go into a home and regardless of what the problem is what they're worrying about is how many roaches are in the apartment and not what the problem is. And we talk about priorities in these communities are high crime areas a city. So we stand to reason that the department would put its best men in these communities. It would put as more experienced police officer in these communities. It does not and has what they call career paths which puts the rookie in a high crime area which puts the just crumple demoted detective and various other types of individuals in these precincts almost as punishment when a police commissioner can sit at one police plaza in lower Manhattan and set priorities for the entire city in New York by saying we cannot deal with street narcotics. That's great. If you live in the upper Bronx or in Bay Ridge or in Whitestone but if you're on 118 street 160 Street and 8th Avenue no good.

Speaker 7 00:13:40.850
You cannot tell me you're not going to deal with street an iconic because that's my problem or both of you are presidents of organizations that represent black policemen and black firemen which means that you have certainly pressures from within department and pressures from your own colleagues as well.

Speaker 6 00:14:00.260
Very briefly Lieutenant Harris How do you respond to those pressures well the pressures that we have. Are you talking about pressures on myself or the organization as a whole.

Speaker 7 00:14:13.340
Well we're talking about pressures on the organization. And as we come to the close of the program we recognize that both of you have tremendous pressures on you and you're doing an excellent job to deal with them.

Speaker 1 00:14:25.510
What are some of the techniques Lieutenant Harris you actually use to deal with let's say a difference of opinion within the Vulcan Society of pressures from the fire department on the Vulcan Society right.

Speaker 6 00:14:40.200
Well most of our problems come with the pressures that the department policies create on our members do all of the black firemen blown to the Vulcan Society. No but most of them do. We have just about 90 percent of the black firefighters belong to a development society.

Speaker 5 00:14:57.010
And the other 10 percent choose not to belong because they don't believe in ethnic organizations or they don't think that anything's wrong with it which is the reason.

Speaker 8 00:15:03.110
Well we we we happen to believe that's because they forgot their blackness but when we search them they they're not here to speak for themselves say to me you just have to make us surmise on that. Right. But the problems are brought to me by our membership and we usually resolve them by meeting with the fire commissioner or the administration in the fire department after documenting our facts.

Speaker 6 00:15:27.010
Now what we do is occasionally we have to get community support and bring community pressure on the department. But most of the time it's resolved internally after we get our facts together and we bring it to the commissioner. And we we look for a fair adjustment.

Speaker 5 00:15:43.480
Well what happens when your society differs from the the line organization or the union of firemen. How do you deal with that.

Speaker 8 00:15:50.500
Well that that we've been dealing with that since we've been in the department in fact the unions will have never been on our side up until the recent crisis when they were closing down firehouses in ghetto areas and then we found something that we could work together on.

Speaker 7 00:16:05.230
When you say the union and everyone decided it means we're doing we're trying to get more money you didn't want them to get MoMA.

Speaker 8 00:16:09.790
No not that. The point was we accept the money. No.

Speaker 6 00:16:13.540
But in that to be serious about is that things that we see it unnecessary if the community and the black community say no and the minority community the union has not worked with us so I'll give you example several years ago in fact about two years ago the federal government were allocating funds to recruit more minorities in the fire department. Now our union turned down that money the UFA did not accept the money for the city New York. On what grounds. I don't know. But you know I don't know the technical grounds but their grounds was that they wouldn't work in the fire department in New York for you know I really can't speak for them but we did this we found out after the fact that the union turned it down. So are we on our own.

Speaker 7 00:17:02.650
We initiated a lawsuit which you know about in addition we recruit minorities ourselves indicate to the public because I am familiar with the lawsuit what the nature of your lawsuit was and how it came out.

Speaker 6 00:17:14.630.0000000001164
Right. We charged that city in New York with discriminatory hiring policies being that we represent less than 5 percent in the fire department the blacks and Hispanics join us in a suit. They have less than 1 percent and the federal courts found in our favor. They said that there was discrimination in hiring policies. So the examination was declared unconstitutional that's a 1968 examination for firemen. Now as a result of that we won the suit and the judge ordered that the city to prepare a new examination that was free from UNC from bias and constitutional. In the meantime the fire department needed more men. So they went to the courts and petition the judge to use the list. The president fired a famous list that was unconstitutional to make a long story short. The judge ruled that they would have higher for every three non minorities high one minority that's one black and white or Hispanic. And under that arrangement getting 25 percent of the men hired we did pretty well. We had in excess of 100 Blacks and Hispanics hired by the fire department. But as I mentioned before those men were laid off due to the fiscal crisis as anything can be done about that. Well we filed E L C complaint with the federal government. And right now that's being litigated now.

Speaker 7 00:18:40.780
That's the Equal Employment Opportunities Commission right. Are you suggesting that despite the fiscal crisis the affirmative action or the Equal Employment Opportunity considerations suggest that instead of laying off the blacks and Hispanics who were most recently hired they should have laid off some whites who had been hired before them.

Speaker 6 00:18:59.830
Well absolutely. We cannot read in other words you don't believe in the seniority system. Well let's do it this way. I believe that we can't redress all of the all of the ills of the past but we cannot allow it to continue so that in this instance and this really is an affirmative action question rather than a police fire question.

Speaker 1 00:19:20.350
You're suggesting in some instances individual members of the white race will have to suffer because of the transgressions of the overall white race against black people and Hispanic people for so long.

Speaker 8 00:19:31.420
Absolutely. Absolutely. Last last hired first fired. That policy has worked against us for a long time and we've paid a price for that as black people and that has to be stopped.

Speaker 5 00:19:42.790
Of course that is an issue which we certainly can't debate completely tonight about affirmative action it doesn't apply just to police fire and it applies to people in labor unions and telephone operators schoolteachers like Sergeant Hargrove Suppose you tell us about some of the things that the Guardians Association is trying to do and how you try to deal with some of the pressures both from within and from where well within we do set up like.

Speaker 10 00:20:09.170
Dick has just suggested individual conscience of an individual commanding officers of units that our members might have a particular problem. We tried to exhaust all the remedies within the department prior to going outside an apartment. We have a monthly newsletter which we publish and distribute some 3000 copies to various people throughout the city in New York highlighting so many injustices or any problems within the department. Recently this year we formed an organization called the Grand Council of Guardians and the New York City Transit Police. We had formerly an organization of black police officers calls Americans which are now gaudy as New York City transit and in housing we had the black police officers in the organization called a practice Orleans which is now Guardian's New York City housing police and we formed a grand council of guardians recognizing that we all had the same common problems and that our battles were the same as far as the community in a city in New York. Beyond that we organize an organization in 1972 called a National Black Police Organization which runs from L.A. to New York and from New Orleans to Detroit. And we'll be holding our third conference in fact this year in Boston from October 10th to the 14th. And you see we didn't pick an easy site for a conference in 1969 to talk about racial concern. In 1976 we'll be going to Louisville Kentucky to hold our Fourth Conference. And recently down in Louisville and selecting the site we were picketed by some 70 hooded Klu Klux Klan is which only hastened our decision to go to Louisville.

Speaker 5 00:21:55.670
Reverend Washington Lee Siegel what are some of the things that policemen national black policemen are concerned about. I realize that many of them in terms of the numbers and the promotions et cetera are things they are concerned about but there is a great concern about black crime. Unfortunately most of the crime in the black or minority areas are committed by blacks or Hispanics or other minority people against each other. All right. And the because of the negative image that has developed in so many instances about law enforcement even when the black policeman attempts to intervene with a black police woman attempts to intervene. You have a negative reaction I'm sure that must be one of your concerns and what are some of the things that these police organizations are doing to deal with that.

Speaker 10 00:22:42.580
Well in New York City this last year we've conducted several crime conferences in minority communities throughout the city of New York. We conducted these conferences with local community groups and Brooke one we hooked up with the East which is considered by a police department as a ultra militant organization. And Brooklyn CORE who is truly not an ally of New York City Police Department but yet the guardians and these two organizations held and conducted crime educational seminars.

Speaker 11 00:23:15.760
What we are talking about is educating the black community and how to cope with crime in their community education as to what types of locks you should have on your door how to file a civilian complaint against a police officer and how to follow it up. We're talking about how to report a crime Reverend get him directly involved with a crime and how to call for policemen and document his inability to solve whatever your problem is and tips on how to as a female protect yourself and what to do when walking the streets at night. And generally an educational program which the police department has miserably failed in the police department puts very little emphasis on crime prevention and especially in minority communities.

Speaker 3 00:24:10.930
What would you say emphasis on crime prevention in order for there to be a crime that has to be a perpetrator as well as a victim. You've talked particularly most recently about things that the victim or potential victim can do. What about your relations with perpetrators. What about your relationships with street criminals. It's alleged that black policemen are harder on their own than white policemen.

Speaker 5 00:24:37.150
Sometimes the leads that they tend to be easier and overlook certain things that white policemen would pick up on. What about that. How do you.

Speaker 8 00:24:45.440
Well I think that's white propaganda.

Speaker 11 00:24:49.520
In the old days a black police officer I would say possibly went overboard to prove to his white counterpart that he was one of them and he was probably the first one to jump out to whip the blacks head. You know he wouldn't let his white partner do it I'll do it you know. But I think things have changed what the black police officer of 1975 to the point that we maybe are now accused of being lenient by our white counterparts. But when you say leniency to the point that if you're in a Hispanic community basically and you know the conditions of that community you know the conditions inside that building and you see a group of people 20 people sitting on a stoop drinking beer you realize understand what the problems are. However you know four white police officers say in a community like Harlem to believe that blacks there what street crap games want Street Narcotics and that a mother has to take a child around a street crap game to get to church on Sunday morning is ridiculous. So I think the establishment has probably glamorized what they want to put out.

Speaker 5 00:26:01.580
Of course that's one of the roles of your organization and the other national police organization. Lieutenant Harris what is happening on the national scene as far as black firemen concerned.

Speaker 8 00:26:11.600
Right. We have International Association of Black Professional Firefighters which we organized in 1970 and. Some of the things we've been doing is the same things we do in New York. We do internationally and I say international but it's really within the United States. We haven't went to the Virgin Islands in Barbados in those places yet but that's a good place to go looking good thinking about it. No but the problems are the same one of acceptance in the fire service by our white brothers. One of upward mobility promotion and the same things with communities same community problems the problem is mainly one of recruitment. And that's what we've put our major emphasis on when we organized.

Speaker 3 00:26:54.650
All right let me ask the question What would you say when you talking to a group of black youth as to why they should join a fire department.

Speaker 8 00:27:04.350
Right. Well the reason why is when you look look at the economy today. Firemen make a good salary but they also get fired if they get high. That's the myth. We don't know about that. A few years ago but it's a good paying job. It opens a lot of doors to you. It gives you a shot at life really. That's why I look at it.

Speaker 1 00:27:22.520
That's interesting because your answer is really one of serving individual or what about the community service aspect right.

Speaker 8 00:27:29.570
Well that's the other aspect. In fact I got a list of things that in fact all organization is a very community active organization.

Speaker 1 00:27:36.920
They're very they've done that in fact they sent they bought a fire truck and you set it down to Mount Bayou Mississippi when they lost their fire truck that was built in Mississippi.

Speaker 8 00:27:45.650
Last year we we get we arranged for the city New York to give them a fired pumper for one dollar.

Speaker 1 00:27:51.860
I think that's indicative of the type of thing that your organization of Vulcan Society can do and the type of things that Sergeant Hargrove talked about particularly in terms of crime prevention and crime awareness in the black community. Show what can be done to help improve conditions in our city. Our guest on tonight soul reason have been Lieutenant Richard Harris president of the Vulcan Society and Sergeant James Hargrove president of the Guardians Association in New York City. Glad to have you both with us tonight. Thank you.

Speaker 12 00:28:19.820
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of African-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 2 00:28:43.520
Please join us again next week.

