Speaker 1 00:00:01.681
Over one million, two hundred thousand New Yorkers who are eligible to receive food stamps are not getting them. Here Patricia Dempsey, Deputy Director of Food Stamp Alert, and Joselyn Cooper, Coordinator of Food and Nutrition of the Council Against Poverty, and the Community Development Agency discuss this important problem on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:43.040
This is Soul of Reason, a program that will examine the roots of the black box. Soul of Reason is produced by the NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time.  Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Speaker 1 00:01:10.170
Tonight on Soul of Reason we are talking with Patricia Dempsey and Joselyn Cooper.  Pat Dempsey is with the Community Council of Greater New York and she's the direct-- Deputy Director of Food Stamp Alert and Joselyn Cooper is Coordinator of Food and Nutrition at the Council Against Poverty and the Community Development Agency and we are concerned about this very important problem of the one point two million New Yorkers who do not receive food stamps even though they are eligible. So Jocelyn could you describe to our audience what food stamp alert is, who's sponsoring it and how you're trying to go about it?

Speaker 3 00:01:48.510
The Food Stamp Alert is a six-month outreach campaign that was funded by the United States Department of Agriculture-- better known as USDA-- through the State Department of Social Services in a special grant to the Council Against Poverty. In the Council's attempt to maximize their effort, they subcontracted to the Community Council who has done food stamp outreach in the past very successfully. And because the grant was small and the time was short it was decided that we need to-- needed to move as quickly as possible. Therefore the food stamp alert was subcontracted to the Community Council of Greater New York and for the next, well not next six months, but for six months starting last October we have been engaged in an active outreach campaign to find the million point two hundred thousand New Yorkers who are eligible for food stamps and not using them.  And as the representatives of the poor and the working poor in New York City, we are here to describe that effort.

Speaker 1 00:03:04.320
Alright. When you use the word "alert" that already shakes people up, you know, it's a "fire alert," it's a "smoke alert," it's a "food stamp alert" which I think is good PR. Pat, to what extent have you been able to get more people who are eligible to respond and then possibly could you tell us who is eligible and then why those who are eligible don't come through? But to start out, you've been in operation since October. How many people have you gotten on the rolls that were eligible and didn't know it.

Speaker 4 00:03:39.301
Well to answer by saying how many people would be difficult because one of the problems we've been having is getting referral forms that were developed for us by HRA returned. We have received approximately 500 referral forms. We have given out over 4000. So we know that the Alert has been effective to the extent that people are taking the referral forms and going to the food stamp offices. Our main outreach thrust has been through campaigns. We've had three campaigns. We are currently in the fourth one. Campaigns we started with what we called ecumenical weekend where we did a million--

Speaker 1 00:04:21.140
Sounds like churches.

Speaker 4 00:04:22.231
Yes, it's churches, anything religious anything religious. We sent a mailing of to 3000 churches, religious organizations, anyone affiliated with any house of worship, asking them to distribute literature to their congregations, to anyone they came in contact with, to send people to us for training. We train people in pre-screening. We ask them to make themselves available to be volunteers for the various community corporations. That was the first campaign. It was fairly successful and the churches are still responding in a slow way but they're getting there. The second campaign was phenomenal. We worked with the unemployment offices and we figured that was a natural group, a natural target group, because the most they could be getting is ninety five dollars a week. From that we had-- we flooded the food stamp centers and there was a lot of feedback that we were just giving them too many people. So in that sense the Alert has been extremely successful. We got all kinds of complaints. One of the suggestions as a result of doing that for food stamps for the Community Cooperation and the CAP CDI structure is that we need to have more outreach not only for food stamps but for all the services, all the welfare services. We were just flooded with all kinds of questions.

Speaker 1 00:05:43.780
Well let's sort of clarify a couple of things. When you say food stamps I assume. you're referring to a program where a person gets a piece of paper which is called a "stamp" which they can exchange for food.

Speaker 4 00:06:00.790
Yes that's pretty much they get something called an ATP card, an authorization to purchase card, which looks like a computer, computerized card and on it it tells them how much they must pay for their stamps.  It's not a welfare program; they have to pay for stamps and and it tells them what their bonus value is-- food-- you always get more food for your food stamps.

Speaker 1 00:06:24.880
Well see this is the reason why I'm sure bureaucrats have difficulty getting something across.  I'm already confused.  Now you tell me I can buy stamps and I can get a bonus.  Well let me find out now how many-- let's say I have ten dollars right? How many food stamps, how much equivalent of food can I get for 10 dollars?

Speaker 4 00:06:42.460
It depends on your income.  We get that exact same question all the time [laughs].

Speaker 1 00:06:46.440
That's why you need an alert [laughs].

Speaker 4 00:06:49.450
It's exactly the reason for the alert because there's so much confusion around what the food stamp program is. Is it a welfare program? What does the bonus value mean-- bonus value simply means that the federal government pays anything above what you actually as a citizen of New York City have to pay for your stamps. So in fact if you were paying 10 dollars for stamps you'd probably be able to buy maybe 15 or 20 dollars worth of food in actuality.

Speaker 1 00:07:16.330
Alright.  That clarifies a little [inaudible]. Let's talk about eligibility.  Who is eligible? Because in a sense I get a feeling that this is one of those federal programs where almost begrudgingly does the government or the administrative bureaucracies give to people with, that which they're entitled to.  So that we've heard that students have abused the program and others have abused the program and I know the Ford-Nixon Administration made a big deal of this.  Now we find that studies have shown that considerable numbers, literally over half the people in New York City who are eligible, don't get what is intended to give them adequate nutrition and adequate food.  So could you tell our audience exactly who is eligible and then you could tell us how one goes about getting the stamps.

Speaker 4 00:08:06.130
OK to again I have to give you one of those, those answers.  Who is eligible depends on something called a "net food stamp budget." In English that means that it's not-- we all get gross income and then we have mandatory deductions, taxes.  That's not your net food stamp income.  Your net food stamp income is done by deducting a certain amount of money that's-- the guidelines come from the federal government-- that you can take for your rent, for your utilities for your telephone, those kinds of things, child care, education, then after those deductions are given to you what you have leftover at the end of the month, if it follows the federal guide-- guidelines regardless of whether you're working or not, then indicates whether you are eligible for food stamps.  One of the confusions has been that because so many people think it's a welfare program, they think if they're working they're not eligible for food stamps.  You can be working, you can own a car, you can own two cars and still be eligible for food stamps.  It's all based on your deductions.  It is a nutrition program.  It is not a welfare program.  The federal government isn't advocating it or not advocating it as in a begrudging way.  It is the way it's being interpreted on the city level that gives you that attitude [unintelligible]. People are not-- the certification workers, the people in the city program-- are not advocating nutrition in an appropriate manner.  They're coming on as if "we're only going to give this to you if you absolutely prove to me that you poor down and out."

Speaker 1 00:09:43.720
Alright. Now you said you can have two cars and get food. Can you have three and get food stamps?

Speaker 4 00:09:49.901
No. The third car would be considered a resource. I mean you could have, you could truthfully have two working people in a family both needing those cars to get to and from work. OK, that's a reality, but to have a third call would be considered a resource--

Speaker 1 00:10:02.700
So you have three working people?

Speaker 4 00:10:04.751
Then you've got a problem. They still would be a resource.

Speaker 1 00:10:07.090
That's the reason why bureaucratic regulations get hung up.  Now what is this bottom line? After you deduct all of these things there must be some bottom line that if your bottom line is below a certain amount you are eligible for food, for food stamps.  What is that in terms of New York City dollars?

Speaker 4 00:10:22.240
There are-- there's a chart. OK? And on the chart it says, for instance, for one person household if your gross income is around three hundred and twenty five dollars, OK, which is pretty low, that you are probably eligible for food stamps--

Speaker 1 00:10:37.621
The three hundred and twenty five dollars a month.

Speaker 4 00:10:38.805
A month. Everything is computed on a monthly basis. Even though in New York City you get your food stamps twice a month, the budget is computed on a monthly basis.

Speaker 1 00:10:48.401
In other words each time you get these food stamps you have to go back and go through these calculations?

Speaker 4 00:10:53.411
No. No. You-- but you do have to go for re-certification every three months and we've been fighting desperately to get rid of that [laughs] that current procedure.

Speaker 1 00:11:02.950
I can see the problem that comes about because of the complexity of this.  And Johnston, since you are the Coordinator of Food and Nutrition at the Council Against Poverty and CBA, could you elaborate on this idea that the food stamp program is really a nutrition program because with all of these complicated regulations it looks to me as though it's a program to give people who don't have enough money in their total family budget money to buy more food but not necessarily better food. I've seen signs in the supermarket that say that certain things like I get cigarettes and beer and a few other things are not part of--you can't buy those with food stamps. could you develop the rationale of how the food stamp program is a nutrition program?

Speaker 3 00:12:00.040
Well the federal government through many many years of investigation of nutrition problems in America-- not necessarily for poor people alone--- have determined that there is a minimum standard for adequate nutrition. And once that eligibility, eligibility was established the concept of food stamps came into being. I'm not exactly sure what year-- I think it's 1962--

Speaker 4 00:12:27.010
64.

Speaker 3 00:12:27.670
64.

Speaker 4 00:12:27.673
Act of 1964.

Speaker 3 00:12:29.531
Fine. And fr--

Speaker 1 00:12:30.701
I believe. Pardon me. I had read somewhere that food stamps actually went all the way back into the so-called depression of the 30's.

Speaker 4 00:12:38.740
Yes that's true.

Speaker 1 00:12:38.954
There was some type of allocation from the Department of Agriculture that dealt with food stamps even that far back--

Speaker 4 00:12:44.841
Yes we have always had some type of food program in, in our country and depending on which administration has been in office has determined how active that food program has been.

Speaker 3 00:12:55.780
Well, I can speak from experience about the first food stamp program that... during the Depression they had what was known as a meal ticket in which the family who participated received a voucher that was taken to a grocer for X number of dollars and cents and for a family of four in 1936 it was nine dollars and 12 cents for two weeks.

Speaker 1 00:13:24.941
Well, given the fact that I don't remember what the cost of living was at that time, that could be a lot of or a little--

Speaker 3 00:13:30.874
It was a little. It was hard to juggle--

Speaker 1 00:13:33.481
It sounds like a little--

Speaker 3 00:13:34.631
It was hard. It was really hard to juggle but that was a reality and I think that the whole question of nutrition has always been important for the survival of a nation. The, the tragedy now is that there is a stigma attached to the notion of food stamps as being a welfare program and not a nutrition program. And in New York City it gets played out ultimately in that the food stamps centers are in income maintenance centers and those people who have negative feelings about welfare centers will not participate in the program because they physically will not go into the buildings. And until we in the city have a consciousness of the changing of the food stamp centers and moving them to a place where there is easier access-- easier psychological access to it-- we are not going to be able to reach our goals and that's rather negative but that's a reality. And the other problem that we have in translating food stamps as a nutrition program is that most people do not understand the requirements and that's what the Alert is all about, to give public attention to the eligibility standards and the deductions and income etc. etc. and that we are in the process of training community workers to become experts in food stamp eligibility and the alert again has broadened the horizons and consciousness of community people as to their entitlements and that is what the food stamp program is about, that Americans are entitled to an adequate nutritional diet.

Speaker 1 00:15:16.120
Tonight o Soul of Reason we are talking about Food Stamp Alert. We're talking with Patricia Dempsey who's Deputy Director of Food Stamp Alert and is with the Community Council of Greater New York and Jocelyn Cooper who is Coordinator of Food and Nutrition at the Council Against Poverty and the Community Development Agency. And I noticed with some of the material that you have brought to the program that one of the requirements is that all able bodied household members have to sign up for work with the state employment service which in a sense sort of contravenes, contradicts the idea that it is just a nutrition program. That all of a sudden its tied in with working and it's obviously tied in with income. It could just be tied him in income and that would work but we also tie it with work which suggests that there's some basis to the thought that maybe this might have something to do with economic status and welfare. What about that, Pat?

Speaker 4 00:16:09.370
Well, I think what's happening is yes, you're right.  I think that, that even though they say very much that its, it is a nutrition, nutrition program that every United States citizen should have three adequate meals that there, there are some things attached to it that we are working very hard to get rid of.  I think they're also trying to tell us that if... you have people who can work in your family then they should work and that you should make food stamps you're your last alternative and we're not sure we buy that at this [laughs] point.  And we know that many people have been rejected when they apply for food stamps simply because all quote unquote able bodied people have not, you know, gone down to state employment but you and I know that that's a game because people who are being laid off every day can't get jobs so why send more people down to, to register for employment when they're not going to get it.  So obviously if they've come to-- they've gotten themselves to the point where they are coming to a food stamp program that is full of all kinds of inhumanities, the whole process is inhumane.  By the time you actually get to a certification worker, you have been put through so many levels of unhappiness you feel that you are such a failure in life that obviously you couldn't find a job on your own.

Speaker 1 00:17:37.030
Well, I noticed that also suggests that households whose income after deductions is twenty dollars or less get free food stamps. Does that suggest that everyone who is on welfare gets free food stamps?

Speaker 4 00:17:51.821
Everybody who is receiving public assistance or SSI--

Speaker 1 00:17:56.080
What is SSI?

Speaker 4 00:17:56.950
Social Security Insurance, Disability is eligible for food stamps and we're not even trying-- our alert isn't even focusing in on that group. We're talking about the working poor. That's the group that we're interested in but that twenty dollars to nothing income is not being used appropriately in New York City. New York City does not acknowledge, recognize, or even act on anyone, get it, who has twenty dollars or less. The assumption is when you go in and they work out your budget, if you come out at the end of the month with twenty dollars or less that you are either hiding resources or you are simply lying. It's illegal. We are currently fighting it through community action for legal services. It's against the federal guidelines and New York City is not taking care of business.

Speaker 1 00:18:45.580
Alright. For those in the audience who might be interested in finding out the location of their local food stamp office for those who want the information in English should call area code 2-1-2 9-2-9-8-800. That's 9-2-9-8-800 for information in English about location of food stamp offices. And for those who want the information in Spanish and call area code 2-1-2 9-6-6-3-800. For information in Spanish about food stamp offices call 9-6-6-3-800. Now in terms of what you've been just talking about, Pat and Jocelyn, the impression that I get is that you feel that the food stamp program is surrounded by certain basic indignities and, in fact, even though it is alleged to be a nutrition improvement program, has [unintelligible] turned out to be a welfare program with some of the indignities that are associated with not working which in fact shouldn't be associated with it because obviously it is not anyone's fault in this society. At least it's not the fault of ninety nine point five percent of the people who are working that they aren't working and part of the psyche or the image that is developed is that something's wrong with people whose income is at such a low level that they have to get help. And what can we do, Jocelyn, in our society to try to dispel this image because this really is where the Ford-Nixon Administration's position named that food stamps were being abused was coming from? True enough the Food Stamp Alert which was passed during the Ford Administration attempts to get more people who are eligible to take advantage of food stamps but still they, these regulations seem to be so complex that it suggests that, gee, you really have to be poverty stricken in order to get the amount of money that's necessary to have a good diet. What can we do about that? What are some of the things that agencies like the Council Against Poverty and the Community Development Agency doing about this? By the way, those are official New York City agencies dealing with community development and dealing with the various poverty corporations.

Speaker 3 00:21:06.601
Well the federal guidelines within the food stamp regulations make provisions for outreach. In New York state that has been a marginal or less than marginal part of their program and we of the Council Against Poverty and Community Development Agency must be [sighs] continually aware that outreach must be a part of our programming and that Congressman Fred Richman in a public statement and who is now Chairman of the Nutrition-- no, I'm sorry, he is the Chairman of the Food Stamp subcommittee-- has said that a priority for him would be to maximize the outreach capacity within the entire national program and that it would be coupled with nutrition education. So between the federal emphasis hopefully superimposed on the state and the city, that what we are trying to do here with marginal resources will be expanded so that there will be a great deal of public attention as this is a public service program within NBC that it will be a national emphasis on outreach. The other piece is to train community workers in the various eligibility for food stamps and several other kinds of programs which I won't take time to discuss in depth but perhaps we can come back to talk about the seven other programs, federally funded feeding programs, that benefit poor and working poor people. And the consciousness raising of not only the people who use the programs but people who negatively respond to deny people their rights is a part of what we have to be about in the Community Development Agency and the Council Against Poverty.

Speaker 14 00:23:08.720
But really you're talking about attitude. You're talking about attitudes of the society at large and you specifically time the attitudes of the officials or the bureaucrats who administer these programs--

Speaker 3 00:23:19.831
And the voters--

Speaker 1 00:23:20.761
Which, and the voters who vote the money to support them or their Congress votes money to support them, and this suggests that there is still some stigma attached to being poor by the way as a generalization. As I hear you talk, the one generalization I would get if I were a listener about this program is that if I think I don't have enough money to eat on adequately I should go to a food stamp center and apply. Is that right Pat?

Speaker 4 00:23:49.861
Exactly, and--

Speaker 1 00:23:50.682
Where are these centers and other the fact we gave the phone number which will give a little later again?

Speaker 4 00:23:56.251
There is there is a center in every borough. In the larger boroughs like Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn there are at least 3, 3 centers per barrel and I'm sorry I don't have the list with me for you. But the other piece I wanted to add to what Jocelyn was saying is that in addition to educating and training and outreach we need very, very strong encouragement of the people in New York City Food Stamp Program and the Director Sidney Brooks to understand that the role of the food stamp program and the people involved are to be advocates. They are advocating for the people of New York City. They're not doing anything for citizens. They are bringing monies back into New York City because that bonus that I spoke about earlier has a multiplying effect that brings money back into the city. So they're not only doing things for quote failures as they see it... they are also helping their own city, a city that is constantly on, you know, bordering on default. In addition we to help community people. And I do a lot of the training for the pre-screening and pre-screening simply means taking gross amounts of money and doing basic kinds of deductions and being able to take, say to a community person a consumer like you and I, "you are probably eligible or not eligible for food stamps." We have to get a certain kind of righteous indignation into these people. "This is mine. It's my right as a United States citizen you're not giving me anything. My federal taxes are paying for it." And if we don't use the program our federal tax dollars go to another state that's using the program a lot better than we are. California is one of our major examples.

Speaker 3 00:25:40.130
They have 85 percent--

Speaker 4 00:25:41.981
That's right--

Speaker 3 00:25:42.050
of their eligible participants and New York state--

Speaker 4 00:25:43.721
We're not even at 50 percent--

Speaker 3 00:25:44.771
We're at 48 for the state of New York.

Speaker 1 00:25:46.640
But again this goes back to attitudes, I think, it goes back to attitudes of people who supposedly have and have done fairly well in society have about the people who don't have, and it goes back to things like wage scales-- the fact that the wage scales in many of the service industries do not measure up to what it takes to actually live-- and that gets into the whole cycle of the economy.  It's alleged that in some occupations for example that hotel or occupation that the people who work there really don't make a living wage and in fact then get subsidized by subsidiary assistance including food stamps which probably accounts for why the bureaucrats who are administering the program some of the bureaucrats feel "Well look I gotta hold back" because as you say, the citizens do this but on the other hand some people may say well look we are subsidizing low paid workers.  Now how do we deal with attitudes like that?

Speaker 3 00:26:39.650
Well, the... the commitment has got to come from the officials of this city.  I don't know how we're going to move them short of striking etc., etc., but they have to understand that in their dragging their feet that in the food stamp program itself they're missing one hundred and fifty two million dollars.  If we could find one third of the one point two million people, the city would benefit immediately and in 12 months. If we could find two thirds, it would auto-- it automatically be 300 million dollars of brand new revenue which has a multiplier effect of four times that if you do not have to spend money for tomatoes perhaps you can buy another pair of shoes for your child with sneakers so it benefits the city not only from a humanistic point of view but purely economics. And that we have to get that message across to the powers that be.

Speaker 1 00:27:40.670
Of course.  You talked about we have to get the message across.  It's true that by officials like yourselves coming to talk on programs like this you help to get people to think about it but ultimately doesn't the commitment to do something for its citizens come from the citizens in that city and not only the ones who are eligible to receive these food stamps but the ones who live in the city and feel this is a humane consideration that people should eat right? Is that not part of what you're trying to do?

Speaker 4 00:28:08.820
That's right.  And that's one of the reasons that our thrust our training thrust has been with voluntary agencies, hospitals, schools, that kind of thing so that everybody can take care of it.

Speaker 1 00:28:22.250
Our guests on tonight's Soul of Reason have been Patricia Dempsey who's Deputy Director of Food Stamp Alert and is with the Community Council of Greater New York and Jocelyn Cooper who is Coordinator of Foods and Nutrition of the Council Against Poverty and the Community Development Agency.  And we've been trying to get more people to be interested in the question of food stamps. For those interested in information about food stamps in English should call 9-2-9-8-800 and in Spanish 9-6-6-3-800.

Speaker 2 00:28:48.590
You've been listening to Soul of Reason with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.  Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.  Please join us again next week.

