Speaker 1 00:00:01.610
Each year hundreds of blacks Hispanics and poor people are treated unjustly by the law. The National Conference of Black Lawyers is an organization that attempts to make the legal system show justice for all. Here Lennox Hines national director of the National Council of Black Lawyers discuss their activities on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:42.480
This is Soul of reason. A program that will examine the roots of the black box. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 3 00:01:09.570
Our guest on tonight soul of reason is Lennox Hines who is national director of the National Conference of Black Lawyers. Glad to have you with us nightlife. Pleasure is mine Roscoe. Well let's get right into the National Conference of Black Lawyers which is what I would conceive to be an advocate group of lawyers who are attempting to make the legal justice system fair to all people blacks Hispanics poor etc.. Could you tell us something about how the organization about how large it is its membership and what is its central progress.

Speaker 4 00:01:43.240
The Conference of Black Lawyers was originated about six years ago grew out of the larger body called the National Bar Association as you know about 50 years ago the American Bar Association had racial discriminatory exclusion clauses. In other words the black members not join the NBA. That's correct. And black lawyers found a need to band together to organize and try and get representation within the bar. In addition they began to lobby so that black lawyers could be treated with respect before the bench.

Speaker 5 00:02:39.560
In other words judges would not be able to just cast them aside. That's right. They just disparaging things about them which was happening in some of the courts. That is correct.

Speaker 4 00:02:48.760
And black lawyers just didn't have the standing to protect the interests of their clients not Not to mention as a consequence were not able to practice the profession in in a way that benefited the interests of their constituency. So the National Bar Association was formed. Right. I have to. The National Bar Association being and which was not black law black lawyers. Right. During the Civil Rights upheaval the Phase 1 of the civil rights movement in the mid 60s. A number of younger lawyers and younger thinking lawyers began to raise the question with respect to services that lawyers could provide to the community. Previously organizations of lawyers were basically professional organizations self-interest groups professional associations like the NRMA and ABC et cetera younger lawyers began to to to develop programs and projects designed to help their constituency. And they attempted to bring about changes within the older body the National Bar Association were unsuccessful in doing that and then formed the National Conference of Black Lawyers. That was done in nineteen sixty nine. The initial goals and purposes of the organization which has remained intact is to provide legal services or to use legal tools in the interest of black and minority and poor communities and to ferret out racism in all its forms within all institutions within the United States. We formed the organization in 69 and then moved to establish a headquarters in Harlem where it is at this point at 126 West One hundred and nineteen street.

Speaker 6 00:05:18.550
We have nongovernmental organization status at the United Nations. And in that regard we have an international affairs task force.

Speaker 7 00:05:31.120
We provide technical assistance to lawyers in the Caribbean and in Africa with respect to a number of cases dealing with human rights violations.

Speaker 8 00:05:47.160
So it really does your work is your work limited to human rights type violations or do you get into situations where people have been abused criminally or have been involved in certain criminal cases where they are alleged to have committed a criminal act.

Speaker 6 00:06:06.250
Well human rights question is isn't of course narrowly construed. When we talk about human rights we are talking about the basic fundamental rights that under under that umbrella comes the whole question of due process question of fairness fundamental fairness and so on. How do you how should human beings be treated.

Speaker 8 00:06:37.800
And OK what I was going to suggest is that we take a perfect example a couple of cases that maybe several cases or types of cases that national conference has gotten into because in the field of advocacy law which I believe is what you call yourselves many times you get into very controversial cases and as you certainly know and the audience may be aware on occasion lawyers who become involved in these controversial cases become get criticized because of the feeling that they should not have gotten into a case where someone had committed an act which is allegedly criminal but maintains that it was done for political purpose.

Speaker 6 00:07:22.470
Yeah. Well not not only do lawyers become criticized but in many cases lawyers become outlaws they as they take on strong advocacy role and the interest of a client at many times the thin line between a client's beliefs and the lawyer's beliefs are blurred and the judges and the public at large began to infer and to trends for political identification and ideological identification of a client to the lawyer. And of course the Conference of Black Lawyers is constantly in that position. The cases that we handle which may be considered to be criminal in that individuals have been charged with breaking certain criminal statutes are basically political in nature as we see them because they the cases that we select are cases where a black and Third World people because of their unpopular political beliefs may not be able to get a fair trial under normal circumstances unless a group of lawyers who do not who are unfettered are allowed to defend them.

Speaker 9 00:08:46.770
We therefore are involved in in in cases that are controversial in nature. We are involved in Attica case where there are 61 indictments.

Speaker 4 00:09:03.880
About 13 hundred felony offenses.

Speaker 7 00:09:10.140
Several of the defendants face more than 30 separate life sentences. The cases are going on at this point. We feel that Attica represents a clear abuse of state power exercised by the then governor of the state of New York Nelson Rockefeller.

Speaker 6 00:09:37.710
We we not only are we providing lawyers who are defending individual defendants at Attica but we as an organization have since 1971 at the walls of Attica supported the demands made by the inmates. Those demands were basic demands of men to be treated as human beings and those were the demands that have been echoed at Folsom and have been echoed at Leavenworth at parchment that solid dad at Rahway at the Yard ville Trenton.

Speaker 1 00:10:24.180
Now across the country in a sense your organization is taking two roles.

Speaker 3 00:10:28.710
One hand is taking an organizational advocacy role to improve conditions in prisons and on the other hand it is defending individuals who have been in the case of Attica accused of committing certain felonies and at least as is reported in the press.

Speaker 10 00:10:48.060
There were felonies committed what would be construed to be felonies people hitting on people hurting people etc. I guess the key question that the public the audience might want to know is how does an organization like yours differentiate between a felony which is committed against an individual and one which in a sense is the result of the way in which society is treated an individual. For example does allege in some of the discussions that no black person should be punished or tried for any felony because the society at large has been so brutal against blacks and therefore you should understand why black people do these things to either each other or to other people. In the case of Attica because it was a situation involving strong confrontations things did happen. The question is who do to whom did they happen and why did they happen. And that in a sense to some of the issues in the trial. So how is obviously the trials going on now and you can't talk about all the details but basically what is the principal of the organization in that instance in terms of defending a person who may have committed a felony. Is your purpose to see that the person gets a fair hearing or trial or is the purpose really to say that it really should not be construed as a felony because black people grew up in a racist society and therefore the felony output is a function of growing up in this type of society a threshold question and the threshold issue is a whether or not that individual can receive a fair trial no matter.

Speaker 9 00:12:38.990
Notwithstanding what what acts he might have committed against society. And we are concerned that if someone because of their race or their political beliefs would not be able to get a fair trial in the courts in the United States then we would step forward. All right. So the threshold question is whether or not a fair trial person can receive a fair trial. Now that is in the area of criminal defense work. Now there are individuals who advocate unpopular political beliefs.

Speaker 6 00:13:15.290
They have taken this stance within the finest tradition within the United States body politic and have brought redress is against the government and demonstrated against the government etc. the state and when I see the state I'm speaking about the the the overall allocated body takes a position of prescribing proscribing sit and conduct that made me feel to know in terms from a social policy standpoint may be unacceptable that changes from time to time.

Speaker 11 00:13:56.270
At one point you know it was outlawed for more than two blacks as you well know to in fact be seen together and to be talking on in a public place. At one point it was against the law and a felony for workers to organize and unions at that at one time. It was and it was unlawful for a black man to raise his hands against the white man no matter what the provocation.

Speaker 12 00:14:31.770
All right.

Speaker 13 00:14:32.460
OK well these customs and laws were challenged and they were challenged by those individuals who did who did to risk inheriting America's rafts in order to protest two wrongs. We take the position that in the event that someone takes that risk there must be they must be given a fair hearing and therefore we step in not some criminal defense. Now there is the other area.

Speaker 1 00:15:08.570
Would that include allegedly criminal acts such as bombing and has as I as I said as I said before what constitutes criminal behavior changes bomb kills a few people. It isn't just frivolous. Wow.

Speaker 11 00:15:26.680
And Mario let me let let let me let me say to you.

Speaker 9 00:15:32.420
We do not advocate violence. I what I said previously was notwithstanding whatever the substantive charges are the threshold question is can this particular person receive a fair trial. Notwithstanding his race or his political beliefs.

Speaker 1 00:16:00.080
That's an interesting question an issue becomes a national question. We just had one recently. One question is can anyone in that particular situation get a fair trial in that national environment where that particular crime against society allegedly occurred. And that's that really is a tough question.

Speaker 14 00:16:17.980
Well what we are saying now is you see that there are there are a couple of issues that you're raising and that is a one can someone receive a fair trial because possibly of pretrial publicity. That is a legal issue that we will deal with. But that is not the issue that I'm raising right now.

Speaker 1 00:16:43.330
I'm raising the question is whether or not someone could receive a fair trial because of the race or and or their political beliefs and by fair trial your position I would imagine is did in fact the individual commit these acts and are there in fact adequate forms of data to show that he did all the players in it that some defendants say well yes I committed the act but I really shouldn't be held responsible for the act because of the way in which society is treated.

Speaker 11 00:17:14.109.99999999988358
We are aware that now that is a defense that is a defense that is put forth in the courtroom we are saying that can an individual can Roscoe Brown Lennox Hines John Davis come forward and be treated as any other defendant.

Speaker 13 00:17:35.140
All right. Notwithstanding his race or his political beliefs can he get a fair hearing.

Speaker 11 00:17:42.910
Would a Jew would would he be able to get a jury of his peers who would come to the table and not prejudge him based upon not what he did and what the basis of what he is alleged to do but based wouldn't prejudging based upon his color or his political beliefs. OK.

Speaker 14 00:18:00.580
Now we get into the other area of what is called affirmative action which is that the bulk of the work that the conference does and this is the steps that are taken legally to eradicate badges and in this year of racism for example in the prisons we are involved in assisting prisoners across the United States in challenging due humanizing conditions within the prison. We have just filed the suit together with the ACLU in Maryland Jessup Maryland in in the the Jessup facility state penitentiary. Prisoners have been subjected to biomedical experimentation by a combination of federal agencies AGW the Department of Defense National Institute of Health. They did take a number of volunteers and codes and subject them to inject live bacteria typhoid diphtheria cholera and pay them two dollars a day. The defense the position taken by the defendants and the defendants in this case were the secretary of defense and cetera. University of Maryland Medical School. Their position was that we obtain the consent of these individuals and they volunteered. Fact of the matter is that in the United States most to human experimentation is conducted on those individuals who are in the least position to give e intelligent or rational analysis of this situation or that the ultimate impact of of their consent. It's generally that projects and experimentation are conducted generally on the least educated poor.

Speaker 4 00:20:24.100
And of course minorities blacks prisons have traditionally been a source of of this reason they might volunteers.

Speaker 5 00:20:34.200
They don't know the consequences. They don't. But I don't care. One of the. Don't do that. That is correct.

Speaker 11 00:20:39.880
I mean they don't have any viable alternatives. A man who makes 50 cents a day in prison and you offer him four times that amount two dollars a day. I mean he is weighing what the heck.

Speaker 13 00:20:55.030
All right so I may get sick for a little while but I'm at least I can get two dollars a day. Well you see our position is that when the state identifies a given constituency a group a class of people as being expendable and then institutes programs designed to in fact injure and in many cases irreparably that particular group then that is genocidal. And we then see a duty to eradicate that that's done by affirmative action.

Speaker 15 00:21:42.060
We go into court. We ask for an injunction. We asked for the prisons to be closed down. We asked for the programs to be abolished. We asked for money damages. Now this is done across the United States on a number of issues.

Speaker 11 00:22:01.500
The basic issue in and around the whole prison question and why we for example supported the demands of the prisoners at Attica even before there was any violence.

Speaker 13 00:22:16.110
We believe that prisons within the United States as constructed and operated served no valid societal function.

Speaker 4 00:22:28.860
We have been led to believe that the incarceration of individuals for staggered periods of times have some rehab rehab rehab rehabilitative AFAIK all of the data and evidence to the contrary. Even state officials are prepared to agree at this point that some alternative process must be developed. But when we Latino conference advocating any particular alternative to prisons. Yes.

Speaker 7 00:23:12.000
First of all we we believe that the problem is is an economic one. It's an economic problem. Most of the people in prisons are not violent. There is only a small percentage of the individuals in prison who are violent.

Speaker 4 00:23:32.550
So the argument for example of keeping those people behind bars to protect them from fears from society is fallacious. You would accept that. Let me just let me finish this process. If we examine who is in prison we see that they come out of two strata of our society notwithstanding their race.

Speaker 16 00:23:55.380
They come out of the unemployed and they come out of the underemployed.

Speaker 7 00:24:03.120
We will if we look at the economic system under which we operate at under best economic conditions it is acceptable for us to have anywhere from three to four percent unemployed. You are talking anywhere around for two to four to five million people. We operate with 10 15 percent underemployed of the working force. You're talking about another 10 15 million people. Now what is done with with with with surplus labor surplus labor. They either have to be funneled into a number of manpower training and development programs and not enough moneys spent in that area all they have to be funneled into basically state supported welfare kinds of programs.

Speaker 3 00:25:04.110
Well agreed. And I think there are very few people who disagree that a lot of the problems are people get involved in crime are economic. But given the fact that some of these crimes do have violent consequences small percentage to what extent. Well let's not say they have violent consequences. Let's say that they do involve violence impact fear. That's right. What other alternative. Greed. I think everyone would agree this the economic base of the society should improve.

Speaker 15 00:25:37.680
Well no I'm not saying that it should improve Roscoe. I am saying that an affirmative step must be taken to provide jobs for people. I am saying that just simply to build halfway houses to develop what are called pretrial intervention programs are forces their forces because you if you haven't if you haven't really identified the core of the problem what you will do is a you will short circuit sending people to the penitentiary or short circuit sending them to the reform schools but you will have them still would hypes in your arms you would have them falling out of the other institutions and not being able to function within the society. So therefore we must there must be an economic solution because when we look at who generally is down at 100 Centre Street if you just take a day and sit in the criminal courts in Brooklyn sit in the criminal courts in Queens in Staten Island in Manhattan you see the wretched of the streets of men of.

Speaker 1 00:26:46.850
Your point is is extremely well taken. I guess the question that I was trying to help you to develop as we come toward closing the program is that the National Conference really taking on the problem of almost the entire society and on one hand you are working for improvement of conditions for people who are in prison and the other hand you are working toward the elimination of certain inequities in society. A couple of questions I want to ask about the organization itself. How many people are you or is the organization and what is your source of support and how can people support you if they would like to. OK.

Speaker 17 00:27:23.660
The organization is made up of 700 lawyers scattered in regions in seven regions across the United States Canada and the Virgin Islands. We generally we do not receive any grants from any of the major foundations our support comes from the people I was support comes by way of small contributions. We would like to ask anyone who would like to assist us to contact us at 126 West 119 St. The National Conference of Black Lawyers. Our telephone number is 8 6 6 3 5 0 1.

Speaker 1 00:28:07.850
I think that's a good point I wish to close this very exciting and penetrating and stimulating discussion with Lennox Hines the national director of the National Conference of Black Lawyers. Thank you for being with us tonight Lennox.

Speaker 18 00:28:20.810
Pleasure is mine. You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Art for one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:36.920
Soul of reason is produced by the NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

