Speaker 1 00:00:01.270
On July 1 1972 Dick good run open did get drawn Cadillac in the Bronx the first black owned Cadillac dealership in New York City. He had that good run discuss the scope and meaning of his business on tonight's soul of reason. This is Soul of reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:37.660
A program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 1 00:01:02.020
With us tonight on soul of reason is Dick Guidry one of the good run Cadillac and everybody who has heard some of the stations in New York knows about Dick Gordon. So welcome to solar reason tonight.

Speaker 3 00:01:11.460
Dick thank you very much Dr. Brown and pleased to be here.

Speaker 1 00:01:14.650
Well let's begin by just talking about the significance of a black person owning a Cadillac dealership.

Speaker 3 00:01:22.450
What I think is significant is that you find that black people in America today are moving into more the mainstream and oh and major Bennison is still the small business that have been owned through the years. Black people today are looking for business that's going to capitalize at the five hundred thousand million dollar figure instead of the 50000 or 25000. Right and that's significant major because not only Cadillac dealership of whatever business that one might decide to go into Cadillac as we know the epitome of the automobile industry. And I'm one of three blacks in this country have been fortunate enough to own a Cadillac franchise.

Speaker 1 00:02:05.410
Well it's very interesting that you talk about the magnitude and scope of the business because if you look at the 100 top black corporations that are listed in Black Enterprise you notice that the scope of the value of these businesses in terms of the value of total American business is really very very small. True enough a million dollar business or a four million dollar business or even a 40 million dollar business is a big business. But in the scope of American business where we talk about billion dollar corporations it's really very small. And the fact that black people for so long have looked the tailor shops and beauty shops and mom and pop stores as black business has sort of stymied our development as black people in business. And when someone like this good running gets on the ball and gets himself into the Cadillac industry in a sense the automobile industry. This is a big step forward which then leads me to ask something I'm sure a lot of people in the audience are wondering about and that is how did that get drawn get into the Cadillac.

Speaker 4 00:03:04.250
But the fact is he's a big man both intellectually and physically how did you get into this big business.

Speaker 3 00:03:09.460
Thank you. Very modest. I started with General Motors when I was 19 years old I was working part time and I was going to school. Where was this. And Chicago and that's my home my mood in New York. Your home is New York now. It is okay when I'm originally from Chicago and every once in a while I kind of forget where home is is. But I started with GM and I start at the bottom of the ladder as a shifter and I worked my way through the ranks and Cadillac I've always been at the top of the GM ladder.

Speaker 5 00:03:39.280
They had a school in Chicago right on the premises. They had a mechanical engineering school and I was fortunate to work my way through that and through management and cattle like I was they then they sent me to general is to technology in Flint Michigan for management and sales management training and in 66 I was made a Salesman which is was one of two black salesmen said Chicago for Cadillac. So you go back a few years and black people even with Cadillac wasn't really doing that much as minorities and as a salesman I was fortunate to earn one hundred thousand dollars a year plus to save enough money to own a franchise. And in 1965 I think Dr. Brown was a first time at General Motors given a black and a vision opportunity to own a GM agency which was an automobile agency in Chicago and that was due to ensure the help of the Southern Christian Leadership of Dr. King to bring in White America around to give blacks an opportunity to move into mainstream. And I was charge chosen by the brass of GM and Cadillac to be a Cadillac dealer because my track record have proven that I could get the job done.

Speaker 6 00:04:50.800
Of course you said it a couple of things which I think are very significant for black people interested in business. One thing you mentioned you went to very light lightly.

Speaker 4 00:04:59.030
You said you saved that of course means that when you begin to hit those big bucks you don't just spend them all as true on Cadillacs and other things not as a trope people might not want to spend but I had a goal in mind.

Speaker 5 00:05:10.970
I knew five years ago that I would be a Cadillac dealer prior to 72 and I knew that I would have to have a substantial amount of cash because you must have 25 percent of capitalization to buy the franchise. It must be tax free money. And believe me they check you very very close to make sure that nobody else involved in a dealership except General Motors money and the candidate. So I knew what I had to have to enter into the Cadillac operation.

Speaker 6 00:05:39.710
So I was working on a particular go and that's one thing that the idea of the goal and the saving and planning for it. The other thing that you mentioned you said General Motors finally gave a black an opportunity to move in to owning dealerships and you acknowledged the work of King in SC Elsie and Jesse Jackson and people of this type who knocked on those doors being those payments that made it possible for some of us who are middle class to be able to do some of these things. I think it's very important that the audience is clearly aware of the fact that you are aware of that and also clearly aware of the fact that still even though you have a dealership and we'll talk about the magnitude dealership with them in a moment as doing very well the fact is that they are very very few blacks who've been able to crack that door and it isn't because they are not many many more good runs around it's because of the system which then leads to the question how do you perceive yourself working both in and in a sense out of the system.

Speaker 7 00:06:38.930
Because obviously you identify with the various movements of black people and on the other hand you're in the system because you are a GM dealer.

Speaker 5 00:06:47.880
Well the position I'm in today number one I want to be not just a GM dealer but a good GM dealer. We've had too many black dealers who have gone down a drain just being a GM dealer they become rich before they make money. But I'm in a position today I think to help back black people by doing a good job and to show the brass of GM and to American society today that given an opportunity that you can get the job done. And they've always asked me for candidates for dealerships I don't know you know what I know. Dr. Brown the GM have a a training program strictly for minority dealers. They'll take an individual with the right amount of capital give him 18 months of training pay him while he's in school and then at the end of his training program he will be given a agency known as the Cadillac Cadillac franchise a very very difficult to get because it's a matter of nepotism because once you get in a visual Cadillac franchise his family and never gets out he goes to the son uncle and so forth and so on and even today if GM General Motors haven't had a factory stores which was owned by GM they start diversions find themselves from retail operation.

Speaker 3 00:07:55.070
I'm not sure I would mean a Cadillac dealer. I would probably be a GM dealer but not a Cadillac dealer.

Speaker 6 00:07:59.300
Very interesting you said GM owned the stores. Does that mean that most of the dealerships in Cadillacs were owned by GM itself or was it about half and half and they decided to divest themselves of were any.

Speaker 5 00:08:11.390
Years ago General Motors own I would say 50 percent of agencies in this country in every three or four years. They start divest himself of those franchise. Now there's none left today. That's what I was coming to. And if I don't get to New York so I really don't know what should one of I would've gotten without probably five times the money that I invest to become a Cadillac dealer.

Speaker 6 00:08:33.230
Now of course New York is a tremendous place in which to have a Cadillac franchise. You're right at Fordham Road in the Bronx right by the Bronx Zoo and everybody knows you probably heard many of the commercials on the air dealing with your agency. What is the magnitude of your agency. Do you handle mostly new vehicles mostly resales mostly black customers mostly white customers.

Speaker 8 00:08:59.150
Just give us some rundown once Black did get her Cadillac as a total in-house automotive center.

Speaker 5 00:09:05.630
We have the lease and retail of used cars new cars parts service facilities you name it. When he comes out of Cadillac we strike a deal with Cadillac that I operate. I have 70 employees. We retail know some place an area about twelve cars a year use about 300 cars a year service facility we probably service about 75 200 cars per day so it's a big operation big operation that certainly is.

Speaker 9 00:09:40.320
And Cadillac is an expensive cost probably a premium American car.

Speaker 4 00:09:44.730
You probably see the premium car in the world but it is a premium American car with the inflation hitting us so hard.

Speaker 9 00:09:52.380
What impact do you envision that this will have on the other will be business in general and very specifically on Cadillacs.

Speaker 5 00:10:00.390
Dr. Brown I usually watch the stock market when it come to kill a customer. You can tell when the stock markets start going down your business drops off. But as I was talking to a friend of mine just before we went on I can't use it as a barometer anymore because we have inflation the market is down. And believe it or not I can't get enough cars to supply my demands. People have money and they spend the money and they buy and catalyse a lot of business people borrow for tax purposes and lot of people who used to train every year and they still trade those cars every year I think. No it's not constant inflation is hurting. But as prices go up salaries go up and it kind of compensate. You know each other.

Speaker 6 00:10:44.550
Of course the other thing is we have a bi modal economy. We have a lot of people picking a lot of black people who are on the poor end of the economy and we have a considerable number of people and relatively few black people who are on the top end of the economy and of course what you're describing is people who have money that flows through and I know that basically I'm sorry go ahead.

Speaker 5 00:11:04.200
You'd be surprised what some people can take ten thousand dollars and do my ratio of customers I would say we do about 6 percent white business and the rest is mostly black and I have some Spanish trade. You mentioned the location of the dealership early in the show. Dr. Brown we assessment all the orders of the parkways were very easy to get to from Westchester Long Island Manhattan. So we service a total New York metropolitan area.

Speaker 9 00:11:31.980
I would say the average customer that buys cars from eyewitnesses in a twenty thousand dollar price bracket as far as income which is not bad at all of course with everything going up and then the surcharge we don't know what's going to happen but going back to buying Cadillacs particularly in the black community the Cadillac has been sort of a status symbol. And many of the people in the revolution have said well look black people ought not to indulge themselves of these luxuries and should do more rudimentary things and maybe even more socially useful things with money as you view your customers. So what are some of the motivations that they have for buying Cadillacs.

Speaker 5 00:12:12.660
Well I think one things Dr. Brown that other makes of cars are so expensive today. We have people drive Buicks and Pontiacs and for a thousand dollars more you can buy a Cadillac. And once you start dealing with the five or six or seven thousand dollar figure a thousand I'll leave you funny it's only 30 dollars more a month. So we've been deprived for so many years of the better things of life. And once an individual can't afford it and put himself in a financial bind. He buys a Cadillac. He wants the best. And I think people work hard deserve the best. And he wants not only to move in a mainstream he want to have some better things in life.

Speaker 9 00:12:47.680
One of the things I've noticed from your commercials and from some people I know who've done business with you is your emphasis on service and your emphasis on courtesy. For example you at least allegedly say or someone can come in and without an appointment and they can get some help with whatever problems they have which tends to place a high premium on service. Is this one of the things that you've learned it helps to make a business good.

Speaker 5 00:13:10.380
It is a key factor. Dr. Brown was strictly talking about Cadillac today but once you purchase an item anybody would say very nice to you. Patch on the back and some sometimes even get a line. But the most important thing is the service after the sale 70 30 in the morning eight o'clock. I'm in the service department everyday greet my customers making sure that they are taking care properly and that's the way I get referrals. And that means more to me than advertised on on the radio for a simple reason you get the customer in. He's got a problem. Then the boss is unattainable. He can't be found. He won't be bothered and a lot of people go down and drain. That particular reason. And as a black businessman more demands are put on you for this kind of thing than then a white operator. Because 90 percent of the people come in to buy a car. Want to see the get wrong. Well you can't run a multimillion dollar business and taking care every detail but I try. But sometime you have to pass a customer on to some of the managers who are well qualified to handle them. Some time I'm sure customers feel list insult but a businessman certainly understand you can't do everything if you can do everything you when you 70 employees you when you need a payroll like I have. So I tried to spread it out but I'm there when he's told it necessary.

Speaker 9 00:14:24.470
I mean not a case of course you're really leading to the next question I was going to ask you and that is what are some of the lessons that you did good run have learned as a businessman that might apply to other businesses that blacks might want to get into. Now of course you identify clearly early that you consider yourself a businessman not just a quote unquote black businessman. On the other hand blacks have not had a lot of experience in business and we are learning every day and undoubtedly someone like yourself has learned a great deal which you might pass on to other black businessmen and white men as well because some of the principles are the same.

Speaker 5 00:15:03.980
I think the the the most important thing that I've learned in business you know what quality we is when it comes to employees without it regardless of color or religion you go at someone that can do the job and qualified to do the job. No question black people have not had an opportunity to learn management and run a care like AIDS is no different damn rain they the any other major business. When you deal with different profit centers one of the most important things that any business man should realize and keep tight control on not only cash flow but your accounting more business call they add for a bad accounting. The first thing I done when I became a business. When I went in business was to get the best accountant that I could possibly find even though it cost you more I have an accounting background but you must have good information to make good decisions.

Speaker 7 00:15:58.410
That's very important key point because when you mentioned that I think about the cigar box accounting that so many small businesses use name they've dropped receipts and the bills in the cigar box and then the year end of the month they try to pull them together and never really know what to finance them together. And you can do it that way the cash flow problem the inventory problem the Bill problem. Those are all things that are key now. What can a person who wants to go into business do to become more familiar with these you've mentioned one thing that is to get a good accountant and of course if you're smart you try to learn from an accountant but there must be some other things that people who are planning to go into business can do to get themselves ready to be able to deal with that hard hard world of business which causes 60 percent of the small businesses to fail well most are the reason most businesses fail because they only capitalize when you go in business.

Speaker 5 00:16:49.390
That's that's a key you must sure make. You must make sure that there's enough capital in the business that you can go over some of the hard spots you know the first 18 months of any business is a rough ish months. And once you pass those 18 months you can really you should be on your way to becoming a told business man and making a profit. And if you're capitalized properly you can you can you can go through it watch your expenditures buy what you can afford to buy. Don't be short when come to hire good managers. If you need him don't be afraid to get involved yourself and make the decision and not depend on somebody else to make the decision for you.

Speaker 10 00:17:27.490
Now these are things important because as you say this makes it appear that there's a awfully steep mountain for blacks who are going into business to climb. For example you say that many businesses are undercapitalized and I believe some of the studies at the SBA Small Business Administration have shown us one of the real problems with black business is minority businesses in particular.

Speaker 7 00:17:46.970
Well how do we square off balance out the fact that there's an increasing drive for blacks to get into business and the desire to do things that would service their own community maybe opening a television repair store or an electrical supply place or what have you. At the same time they don't have the capital because of the fact that many blacks have been in low salary in college man. SBA hasn't come through yet. Are there some other means of mobilizing as capital collective means using unions other things. What are some of your ideas.

Speaker 5 00:18:19.610
What I would like to see a I would like to see the make of black business in New York join together in forming some type of coalition to capitalize and give some management training to people that go on in business would I think be very important. Number two I would like to see the black individual I want to go in business location means a lot a bank today don't want to put a lot of money in our area spending got it out and get a return on it on the banks investment of whatever financial institution looks very bad. So I'd like to see him was one of a black guy going into a very wealthy white area and open a business. They've been doing it for years in the black community been very lucrative. And I think the right individual Edna right wealthy area could do very well with any business loans community need that kind of business. You don't have to go in with racial hang ups you can't do business that way you go in as an American business man just happened to be black and you're saying some key things.

Speaker 4 00:19:20.660
As a matter of fact we've heard these before on this program people who talk about business the need for the service the quality of the service to capitalization. The fact that you approach the entire business population on the other hand as black awareness has increase there has been much more discussion and concern about black people owning businesses and black communities and serving the black community. And the same thing is true with Hispanic people like the Puerto Rican people in New York.

Speaker 8 00:19:52.570
How do you balance that all around.

Speaker 5 00:19:54.580
I mean say okay I'm very very grateful for my black trade my white trade in any trade that I might get but to open a major business in a predominate black area. You don't get the support of the black community. That one might think you mean the financial support or emotional support or the protection or the financial support the buying. You know you got a lot of leaders and a lot of black people to make statements that we're so proud of having a black businessman doing that. And at the same time they go someplace else to spend their funds. And that's the reason I say you should be in an area where that you can be a businessman to not only black community Hispanic community white community but you have to be in an area that can serve the total community told America. And this is what it's all about.

Speaker 4 00:20:45.400
Well let's look at that though. Here we have the Harlem's of New York the Bedford Stuyvesant is the South Bronx is the Jamaica as a South Jamaica as these areas that have high concentrations of black people and they have had fairly good business activity in the past. Now as a result of the civil disruptions of the late 60s many of these businesses were burned out and closed out and they left. Yet at the same time these black folk and Puerto Rican folk have to get on a bus or the train and go many many blocks away to shop. Could it not be conceive that a good well planned business venture or series of business ventures on 124 streets and on the Fulton streets of New York might not draw those people back. You know many of the big department stores that went out to the suburbs are now beginning to close some of their suburban branches and bringing people back to the city. They're doing it by having different types of ours a changing of physical arrangements with the stores.

Speaker 7 00:21:48.760
In other words I'm really raising the question is are we in such a defeatist position vs Ivy the impact of poverty and crime and business migration from the black communities that we have to continue that or is it not possible with a broader conception not just a good drawn out Roscoe Brown but a broader conceptions of black people to really consider the possibility of revitalizing the business in their communities.

Speaker 5 00:22:17.530
Well the business of any community is a backbone of the community. The business people pays the taxes they employ the people in the community. So it would be good. But I think that before major businesses will start moving back in to areas that's been victim of rights the community itself will have to do deal with the situation of crime deal with poultry deal with window breaking and all the other problems because when you invest two or three million dollars on a business you want to finish to grow you want it you know to be proud of the business. It's difficult to get finance institution to put that kind of money in those areas. I'd like to see Harlem revitalized. No question about it.

Speaker 8 00:22:59.800
I think a hundred 25th Street the property and location of Harlem is probably best in New York. Yeah right almost right across the bridge. I suppose the center's not being a New Yorker years ago scares me but I understand that Harlem used to be the place to live the place to go and it could be that again. I think the federal government and city government should get involved and rebuild Harlem put streetlights down and make it work. If whites want to go out to nightclubs it's safe and take the fear of the American people that you mentioned Harlem today. Most people well you know you need two shotguns to go down there and this shouldn't be because a lot of that is hysteria. Well I'm sure there is a lot of yeah I'm as all over but part of that I'm sure I go down in I well being black but I don't think we're having problems. I like to visit Harlem. I like talking to the people. That's good business people in Harlem.

Speaker 7 00:23:55.360
Yeah part of it is the attitude. Anyway I did good run goes he's going to get along because he has a positive personality and part of the problem about particularly some whites getting hassled in Harlem is that the attitude is of you know I won't be hassle all of a sudden you get hassled. But basically that isn't a problem. Harlem basically is about as safe or dash unsafe as any other part of the city. I think the problem that you mentioned earlier about pilfering in stores and damaged things of this type. That's a problem all over the city and particularly is it a problem I imagine with a black business because you have black businessmen running a business in an area which were previously run by whites. And the habits are picking up and breaking and stealing and so on continue. And then when the brother gets caught or the sister gets caught by the guy then there's some problems about it and people say you're trying to run us out et cetera. How can we do some consciousness raising in our own community to help us to see that is part of the answer. Business people making overt social commitments in terms of providing money for social programs and communities are being seen because this is a very practical problem and you're not the first black business person I've heard describe this problem it's a problem all over the city but particularly is it a problem when it's a black business man versus a black person who's been involved in some type of pilfering.

Speaker 5 00:25:17.130
I think that the black community and the people in the black community don't get the respect to the black businessmen that they will give to white businessmen. And if an individual call for Pilcher say the first thing I'm motion would say Well give me a chance brother. In the meantime he's got your garments he's got your car whatever the situation might be a bit issue and I think he should be punished to the extent of the law because when doing it when Red does do he's not gonna help you pay the rent you know. So we have to treat each other and respect each other as business people as consumers as buyers or whatever big institution because you hit the nail on the head.

Speaker 4 00:25:57.790
The key word is respect a question that's really what black awareness has been about. But what about some of the contributions of businesses to social programs in the community because so frequent said Well the brother comes in here and he takes the money out just like the white brother and goes up to Westchester Long Island and doesn't do anything for our community.

Speaker 7 00:26:17.190
What about about commitments on the part of business. Black businessmen.

Speaker 5 00:26:21.490
Well I can only speak for myself. I've been deeply involved in some social problems in Harlem and in the black community. I serve on the Marin Cancer Society boys club in the Bronx and East branch which is a very very tough area. Rotary Club better business bureau the Chamber of Commerce. And these are some of the things that that I do necessary charities I'm always involved in some political people. You know I help. So it's not a situation where that a black man is looking really looking to rape the community of funds and go to West Chester wherever he may choose to live. But as I was I'm sure you'd find very very hard not to spend money in the community what you do in business and this is what creates ghettos when you take the money out. And I'm sure black people in the in any black community realize this and they put their money back where they receive it.

Speaker 10 00:27:21.390
Of course you have hit the nail right on the head. As a businessman you've talked about good business you've also talked about social responsibility and you've talked about what you yourself do and in a sense you and I and a number of others are urging other black businessmen to make these type of contributions to their community. And at the same time you're urging the black citizen to respect you and other businessmen because of your commitment to trying to make things better for everyone.

Speaker 5 00:27:50.010
Well most of the black businessmen that I met in New York Dr. Brown I'm sure is involved in many of the activities I am because we meet them guys like Bruce Allen can share what Calvin Benson who just put a major bill in on a hundred 25th Street and all these guys a chip purchased son all involved in a community and they want to see the say we're the last of the black community Moore said go all right.

Speaker 4 00:28:13.940
Well that's a good way to summarize our program tonight I'd like to thank Dick. Good run of Dick good Ron Cadillac for being our guest on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 11 00:28:21.630
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Art for one hour on affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:36.240
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

