Announcer 00:00:33.200
[intro music] This is SOUL OF REASON, a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:01.150
Black theater is increasingly gaining stature and importance in the theatrical world. Tonight on SOUL OF REASON Duane Jones, Executive Director of the Black Theatre Alliance -- a coalition of Black theater and dance groups -- will be talking with us about new developments in Black theater and dance. And we're glad to have you with us tonight Duane.

Duane Jones 00:01:20.691
Thank you Roscoe.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:22.190
Well as we've said on this program many times, Black theater has been sort of the energy source for Broadway theater in the past -- certainly -- seven or eight years. The same thing might be said about Black dance with Alvin Ailey, Arthur Mitchell and some of the other companies. One of the things that I understand that the Black Theatre Alliance tries to do, and we have had in past years Joan Sandler and Peter Bailey -- both affiliated with the Alliance -- on the program, is to be sort of a coordination and catalytic base for Black theater; and your coming on as executive director marks a new era and sort of an expansion of the program of the Black Theatre Alliance. So before you talk about the projects that the Black Theatre Alliance are into for the summer, let's talk about your new regime or the new regime at the Black Theatre Alliance. What are your objectives? What are some of the things that the Alliance is trying to accomplish?

Duane Jones 00:02:28.340
Well one of the major things that the Alliance has accomplished, and that I think I see myself as an extension of, is the ability to endure in a city where it is not necessarily a welcomed entity. So one has to really take his hat off to Joan and to Peter and those people who have seen to it that, since 1969 and till present, there is in fact still a Black Theatre Alliance. The Black Theatre Alliance was in a slight bit of difficulty in that it had taken them several months to find an executive director. And my coming on then necessitated doing some back work before I could really establish a regime and set distinct goals and objectives for my regime, if you like.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:14.000
Matter of fact, I personally think they're very fortunate to get you because, not only have you been a Professor of Speech and Drama in English, but you also have been an actor; including acting in a very interesting film, GANJA & HESS. And one of the things I was going to ask you a little later on the program -- I'll ask you now -- how does it feel being on the other side of the fence?

Duane Jones 00:03:34.250
Well, it's really not the other side of the fence, because I think that first of all we have to say that the Black Theatre Alliance is a service organization for those who are not familiar with that kind of term, there are essentially three distinct kinds of theatrical organizations: there are presenting organizations, like the Harlem Cultural Council for example; there are producing organizations, like Woody King; and, then there are service organizations, like the Off-Off Broadway Alliance or the Association of Hispanic Artists and Black Theatre Alliance. So we then offer services to our membership and hopefully provide a service for the New York community and the American public in general. I think that needs to be said, that we don't produce plays necessarily. So to that end it is kind of a different side of the fence. But having been an actor, and I think a teacher, affords me a kind of insight I like to believe, and what I think some of those significant services should be.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:38.750
All right. In a word what is the main focus of the service of the Black Theatre Alliance?

Duane Jones 00:04:44.540
It is to the membership; that's really what I was trying to spell out. In other words the arena of theaters created by the Alliance is a very distinct kind of an arena. I think it is important that, for example, the Negro Ensemble Company and Arthur Mitchell are probably the only two major Black theatrical institutions in the city that do not belong to the Alliance. That is to say that the arena of the Alliance is an arena that can very easily get ignored and is very often ignored, if one depends upon the NEW YORK TIMES Sunday section for an announcement of what is and what is not theater in this city... what is and what is not going on. Those theaters created by the Alliance tend to be ignored by such organs as the NEW YORK TIMES, etc. I'm not picking on the TIMES necessarily, I'm trying to show that there is a discrete need out there. Obviously they then came together in '69 and announced their needs and have been addressing themselves to it. Largely some of the problems and the focus and thrust -- not to digress, but to try to answer your question -- of the Alliance is essentially political. A lot of advocacy has to be done in the support of all arts and specifically in support of Black theater and dance in the city, the state and on a federal level. We have to continually address ourselves to those things that might, if we ignored them, bring about our own demise.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:18.350
All right, well, one of the things that I've observed is, that the type of theater companies and dance companies that are in the Black Theatre Alliance, are the type of companies that really do develop the talent for the major productions, for the television, for the films, for the Broadway stage; and at the same time they probably do more in communicating political and politically oriented theater to the Black community, and those segments of the white community that choose to become involved.

Duane Jones 00:06:47.860
Absolutely.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:49.250
That some of the productions aren't quite as polished, but on the other hand the messages are very strong and very strident, and they're giving large numbers of people an opportunity to develop their writing skills, their directing skills, their acting skills and so on.

Duane Jones 00:07:06.380
A case in point is Esther Rolle's returning to Woody King's Henry Street Settlement this week... last night, I believe they open ...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:12.441
... in Macbeth.

Duane Jones 00:07:13.110
Yes and it's hard to conjecture, but it's a little easy to get to the fact that: who else but Woody King would have created an instance for Esther Rolle to come back and do Lady Macbeth? Who else would envision or see Esther Rolle as a valid Lady Macbeth? My point is then, that Esther Rolle -- one could say, well she has achieved a certain level of attainment, but certainly Esther as an actress -- is continually growing and searching and stretching and I think that that is one of the services that theaters that make up the Black Theatre Alliance provide for the artists, the performing artist in this instance; but you're equally right about the directors, the writers, etc.. So not only do we serve as a training ground for Broadway or Hollywood or whatever if you like. We also serve as a very vital political and experimental base for all Black theater artists -- technicians as well, they're not to be ignored certainly.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:13.840
Now most of the funding for the Theatre Alliance comes from the Cultural Council, or the Council of the Arts, or the Endowment for the Arts, or from private donations.

Duane Jones 00:08:25.880
It has come in the past from private foundations ... corporations. I received an unsolicited, small check the other day from the Capezio Foundation. We receive funds from the New York State Council on the Arts and the National Endowment, etc., and also private donors, and benefits that we can hustle up ourselves -- that kind of thing.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:49.670
Well as you use this money one of the things that I find of most value to myself, well, being at the University and also being in the media, is your monthly newsletter describing all kinds of things that are happening throughout the theater and dance world in New York. I find that to be, to me, the single, most helpful thing that I get across my desk about theater in New York... about Black theater in New York.

Duane Jones 00:09:17.360
Thank you Roscoe, that's very good to hear because we've struggled to keep that newsletter at a certain quality because people do have an expectation. We've already built up a need for it, just with a few issues; and I think it's kind of a first. I don't remember an equivalent journal or newsletter specifically devoted to Black theater and dance. So we're very interested, we're always trying to expand it; and there has developed a great reliance on it, not only from audiences but from possible funding sources for people who want to book shows, for example, the Hospital Audiences, Inc. rely on it very heavily to see what is going on during a specific month. So we're kind of proud of it.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:59.810
Yes, sometimes people come in and say what's happening in Black theater. Well, I may have forgotten, but I can always go to the file and pull out the newsletter. In fact, I usually try to keep it on our bulletin board in a contemporary month and we'll go over and look at it and be able to identify, something is happening somewhere that should be exciting.

Duane Jones 00:10:17.400
Yes, it serves that same function for me because sometimes of a Friday evening I decide well I would like to go and see something and my own newsletter sometimes is the only thing I have to rely on. [CROSSTALK] keep all of that information in my head. So it is ... it is a val... that kind of a service that we provide. There is an example of what a service organization.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:34.851
All right, what are some other services that you provide?

Duane Jones 00:10:37.400
We provide -- this is in the way of a commercial -- but we do provide an annual festival which is coming up very soon in the last two weeks in June. The theory of the festival is that by coming together and doing a joint festival we afford our companies a greater kind of visibility etc. etc..

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:57.410
When is the festival? Because I recall now that you mentioned it is but last year this time that either Joan or Peter were talking about the festival. I think it occurred in July last year. And could you tell us about when it is going to be and I know it's articulated throughout various Black theaters it's just not in one place I believe.

Duane Jones 00:11:17.870
Oh that was an approach at one point in time when some of our money ... some of our grants frankly had not arrived and we were not sure we had enough money to put on a festival. Some little money has arrived and we are now seeking a central place. In fact I was looking at the downstairs facilities at City Center because that has a kind of Midtown visibility. We're also looking at several other places. That is an evasion frankly. But we do not have a theater yet and we are searching [for] one. As a matter of fact when I leave here I have to go and look at two others. So by June 12th, when we are aired, we will have a theater. It will be duly announced and it will be during the last two weeks in June.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:05.420
One thing we might mention is that anyone in the audience who is interested in learning both about the activities of the Black Theatre Alliance but specifically about their summer theater festival should call 247-5840, that's 247-5840, for information about the Black Theatre Alliance or perchance if they want to write, they can write to 162 W. 56 St in New York City. Duane Jones is the executive director and if he's not there I'm sure someone in the office will be able to give you some information about what's happening because this ... the summer of course is a very important time for theater. It's important in two ways: one is that a lot of people have a lot of time on their hands; and, it's also important because it's easy to get around and you don't have to worry about the weather and the days are long and the nights are short, so it's an excellent time to explore theater. We will have on one of our upcoming programs George and Joyce Williamson from Newport and New York Jazz Festival which is again something that happens in July and attracts a lot of people. We frequently deal with sports as well -- Olympics and Junior Olympics. So the summer is a very, very important time. Are there any major Black theater events, other than your own festival, that are currently on the drawing boards for the summer?

Duane Jones 00:13:33.920
Well there is one that is in the working stage. Woody King is doing a very important film, a documentary film, on the Black theater movement and he will be filming that during the summer. Of course, the public will not have access to it won't be made available until he has finished it; but that will in fact be going on during the summer. The Dance Mobile is by now an annual event that does play ... take place during the summer. Many of our dance companies do perform in the Dance Mobile. And I don't know if I ever said, but there are 52 members of the Alliance; and of those 52, a great many of them will be doing their own individual programs; all of which will be announced in our newsletter.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:20.140
All right do you have ... you mentioned at times before; but I was wondering do you have any real difficulty getting coverage by the so-called major media or is it something that's more or less idiosyncratic? Sometimes you get coverage and sometimes you don't?

Duane Jones 00:14:36.740
Well I think the problem is ... it ... is a little hard to pinpoint, but it can be traced back to some of the funding sources. Some of the major funding sources do not see our theaters as professional theaters. Therefore we are funded through special programs, or expansion arts, or those kinds of offices of the funding agencies. That then filters down to, I think, the news media's vision of us as being somehow community based, slightly amateurish, non-professional etc.. I think those are some of the reasons and rationale for our being ignored constantly. The answer, in a word, is yes, we do have difficulty getting exposed through some of the major news media. Now a full page ad in THE NEW YORK TIMES is very costly and most of our companies cannot afford it; so that's some of the problem, very succinctly: money. We cannot always afford to publicize ourselves. Therefore our newsletter does become an even more important service to both the public and to our members; because we do stay on top of what is going on in our own arena; and try to keep that always before the public so that they know that we do in fact exist. In fact, one of our mottos is -- the Black theater is alive and quite well in your own neighborhood.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:05.670
That's a good motto. Tonight on SOUL OF REASON we're talking with Duane Jones, Executive Director of the Black Theatre Alliance; and in a sense, we're talking about the vitality and the vigor of Black theater. One of the things that I frequently ask my guest about, when we talk about Black theater, and that is support of Black theater by the Black community. Most of these theater and dance companies are located in the Black communities of the New York metropolitan area.

Duane Jones 00:16:34.530
A good many of them are.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:35.360
And the real question is how much does the Black community support these, and how can we get more support from the Black community for Black theater and dance.

Duane Jones 00:16:45.240
I must say, in defense of the Black community, that I think they are supporting it more than they're sometimes given credit for -- not nearly as much as we, who run theaters, would like, but far more than they have in the past. For example, Black fraternal and social, and religious, and civic groups do sometimes go out of their way to develop theater parties; and do take some of their own constituents to our performances. This can be seen at any number of places. That did not happen in the ... even in the late 50s, I don't remember that thing ... that kind of thing happening as much. To develop a theater party and say you were going to see a performance of whatever, was considered kind of dilettantish. I think that stigma has been erased. So those kinds of organizations do feel freer to move toward us; and that kind of communication is going on. There are people like Vivian Robinson who has formed a corporation called AUDELCO which means Audience Development Company, and they very religiously go about developing audiences for specific Black theater events; and everyone in Black theater takes his hat off to Vivian. Vivian, of course, has had problems getting funded. For example,... so her office is in her own home, etc.. But in the meantime she does do a Herculean effort in supporting Black theater. Black college groups, etc. are very much in support of Black theater that we're constantly being called and asked for our touring brochure, which is another of our services, that we send out to colleges... groups who want to book our companies -- though we don't act as a booking agency, we just act as the organ that is disseminating that kind of information... making it available. Those kinds of things are in fact going on. They could go on to a greater extent, but I think one has to be grateful for the fact that they are in fact going on. So that is serving as a model for other people to follow. And I think it's coming along. I don't feel negatively about that.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:58.080
I can readily agree with your position. However, I look frequently toward the ideal, and I do believe that Black theater is such an important part of Black life that we really need to make more overt steps toward getting support for theater.

Duane Jones 00:19:18.360
You're absolutely right. Considering the fact that there are, at last report, some 60 or more Black millionaires in this country, it is a little hard to justify the constant daily survival struggles of Black dance and theater companies; because somehow there should be a bridge created. The people who have that kind of money and who would probably support it, must somehow find their way to us. And I think eventually that is one of the long range goals of the Black Theatre Alliance, to afford that kind of nexus that kind of connection so that that does happen.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:53.700
I'm sure that that is one of the goals, because I've heard, not only you talk about it, but I've heard Peter and Joan Sandler talk about it. But let's ... let's look at some ways that maybe Black theater can reach the Black community more ... more effectively. For one thing many plays are not always easy to understand. And even if they are easy to understand, in terms of the four letter words, and so on, the real themes, the character development, what you're trying to get over, is lost on some people. And it has nothing to do with education, it really has to do with the fact that one of the things about understanding theater is you have talk about it; and I sometimes feel that we could... I go to many of these theater groups... that maybe if some of us who were involved in the theater went around to church groups and social groups and talked about what our plays are trying to say, then it stimulates people who hear us talk about these things to want to come and see them.

Duane Jones 00:20:59.570
Yes, it's true.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:00.260
Because sometimes... and this is not true just of Black theater, but it's true of the arts in general... the general population thinks that artists and playwrights and so on, aren't just a bunch of kooks who indulge in their own egos, who are talking about things that really aren't that important. And it's my view that everything that's talked about -- not everything, but at least most of what's talked about -- in theater, particularly Black theater, is very, very important and it requires us, as a people, to understand and interact and discuss; so that then when we go to the point of asking for support -- support at one level of just coming and paying to see the production, support at the other level of maybe investing in some aspects of the production -- then we have a more enlightened audience. I'm suggesting ... and actually I probably am going a bit far... but I'm suggesting that one thing that we need to do -- in a sense this is probably the reason why we talk about theater so much on SOUL OF REASON -- is to help the public to begin to understand what is ... what the messages are in the various forms of Black theater.

Duane Jones 00:22:09.680
Well first of all I must say that is one of the things that Vivian Robinson and the women who work with her through AUDELCO actually do. There are few of them, so the numbers of people that they can hopefully reach are statistically small but the fact that they go about that year in and year out will I think eventually find its mark that that will become an important force in the development of Black audiences. I also think, I have to say Roscoe, that I really do feel that that problem that severance between the artist theater artist and the public runs almost as a mathematical constant throughout American society. However I feel that we as a people, so recently emerged from slavery, focus very poignantly on our needs on a very, very specific about them. Therefore we need other kinds of things than the general American public needs; and some of those needs are ... could be met, let me say, through the Black Theatre Alliance and some of the performances that go on. In other words I'm trying to say that one is far more likely to see something that is reflective of one's own life in a performance through one of our companies than one is going to see on Broadway. THE WIZ is fabulous performance... fabulous production; but it is on the level of fantasy. If you want to see something that really reflects -- and it's entertaining and all those things, this is not a put down of THE WIZ, I'm trying to focus on another kind of almost spiritual connection that can be made between one's own roots if you like and what one is seeing on the stage -- those things tend to go on in greater abundance in our theaters than they do, say, on Broadway.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:53.270
Well that really relates to the next question I was gonna ask you and that has to do with what's really happening in terms of the content of Black theater, particularly community theater. One of the oldest community theaters and most effective was the ... I think they call it ... the Harlem Theater Guild that operates out of the Y on West 135th St.. And they did some Black productions like ANNA LUCASTA, but mainly their claim to fame came from doing Black versions of white plays; and of course Shakespeare is a constant. And on one of our recent programs we interviewed Barbara Montgomery who's playing Lady Macbeth in La Mama's...

Duane Jones 00:24:32.220
Yes

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:32.931
...production of HAMLET ... of, pardon me, MACBETH; and someone had been talking about a Black company taking on and doing HAMLET. And those are constants, but -- by constants I mean cultural constants in some of the themes in terms of power and deceit and so on, are universal. But what are the themes that are really emerging in Black theater today? Or can we say that Black theater still... is still groping? At one time the theme was almost all total anger. More recently we've seen more concerns about the intra-psychic development of the individual or the Black family. What do you perceive just generally in terms of what's happening in terms of the content of Black theater, particularly vis-à-vis that earlier comment about more apt to see ourselves and our culture in our plays?

Duane Jones 00:25:36.640
I think that the kinds of plays that you're talking about were really characteristic of the 60s, and we all know that it happened; but I think it was also an inevitable phase that Black people and Black theater artists had to go through. If you're familiar with a group called the Frank Silvera Writers Workshop, where they do weekly readings of new works, and the writer's work is critiqued by professors of literature, whoever... they're always moderators. If one sees a given number of those readings and tries to decide well what is the new Black playwright into -- sometimes they're not always new playwrights by the way they're just new works -- I'm not sure that one can say that it is this, that, or the other, any more than one can say that Black people are all, as a body, here or there. I think that the groping, the searching that is reflected in Black theater is first of all taking place among Black people, and Black theater simply, as I said, reflects that groping and searching. I do see some tendencies. Tendencies to be more experimental, to be more daring, to be whatever might spell avant garde for our purposes, to be more lyrical, to be more poetical, not to be put in a box. People are really trying to find their own voice as artists first of all. And I think for a community of artists that is one of the most vital things that could be going on. Whereas, in the 60s there seemed to be formulas, that if one did not write in a particular mode it probably was not going to get put on the stage, and if it was, it was not going to get attended. That has been lifted from the artist to a great extent; and it's almost intangible you can't really put your finger on the lift, but if you begin to watch what the playwrights are producing, I think they are getting down to some very, very crucial things for themselves as writers and what will happen, I think, is that some major American playwrights will evolve from this new group of whom we will all be proud.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:43.120
All right well what about the rapprochement with white theater? Because one of the things that we're finding is that many of our well-known and established actors, actresses, playwrights and directors are moving into the white theater motif and an example would be the redoing of THE WIZ or GUYS AND DOLLS; or some of the other things that are coming up, now.

Duane Jones 00:28:09.160
I don't think that has to stop. People have to stop seeing that as Black theater; or as the only thing that Black theater is going to be. Black people, some of us, will always want to do THE WIZ, so there will always be an audience for it. I think those things will be constant; but we must begin to stress and focus and emphasize the other very vital things that go on in Black theater and dance, that do tend to get ignored, that don't have the high visibility of a WIZ, for example.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:36.131
As you think about the ... a trend that has emerged somewhat, that is some of the larger white producers picking up Black plays that have [CROSSTALK] ...

Duane Jones 00:28:50.052
I have a very interesting comment on that, by the way. I just left the meeting from the New York League of Theatre Producers, and it seems that in the last ... over the last four seasons, the net profits from Broadway have leapt by 20 million dollars a year. They are about to do a survey now to see if that is due to this greater influx of Black theater and regional theater. They conjecture that it is already, but they are about the business of documenting now; and that's where you started in our interview by saying that we were an energy source. We know and sense that. We see it happening. The New York League of Theatre Producers is about to document that, for all of us, very soon.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:29:25.572
And I think with the energy that's behind the Black Theatre Alliance, in the form of Duane Jones, we can know that Black theater is alive and well and is kicking and screaming. Our guest on tonight's SOUL OF REASON has been Duane Jones who is the Executive Director of the Black Theatre Alliance. And anyone in the audience who wants to get information about the Black Theatre Alliance should call 247-5840. Thanks again Duane for being our guest on tonight's SOUL OF REASON.

Duane Jones 00:29:51.850
Thank you for having me Roscoe.

Announcer 00:29:53.291
You've been listening to SOUL OF REASON with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. And featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. [outro music] SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

