Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.950
The New York Urban Coalition speaks for the poor, the minorities, and the disadvantaged of New York City. Hear Arthur Barnes, President of the New York Urban Coalition discuss the problems and the future of New York City on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:37.280
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time.  Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:04.160
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Arthur Barnes who is President of the New York Urban Coalition and is a well-known fighter for the rights of all people in New York City. Glad to have you with us tonight. Arthur.

Arthur Barnes 00:01:15.561
Pleasure to be with you, Dr. Brown.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:17.540
Well since you were last on the program a few months ago a lot of things have happened in New York City.  One of those things is that one of our colleagues, the Honorable Percy Sutton, is announced for candidacy as mayor of the city.  Another thing is Big Mac is back on the drawing board and trying to solve some of the financial problems and still another thing is that there's a court decision that says that the bondholders have to be paid the million dollars that are owed to them by the city.  So with all of these things happening--and we put on top of that the worst winter we've had in 200 years of the republic--with all of those things happening, how do you as the president of the private agency that speaks for the poor and the minorities of the city look at where we stand, what does 1977 look like to you and what are some of the things the coalition is doing to try to deal with some of these problems?

Arthur Barnes 00:02:15.080
I wish I could be optimistic, but as you describe the terrible state of affairs that we find ourselves in in New York City, I have to say to you that I think it will get worse before it gets better. All of the elements involved in the parameters of the problem in New York City that we all face as New Yorkers point to that. I think that that is going to be a fact and certainly the fiscal condition of the city itself has not improved to any appreciable degree. Add to that the terrible fiscal condition that the state is in. And I think that what we have are the elements for continued financial problems for the next foreseeable future.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:58.700
And of course the brunt of these problems is placed on the poor.

Arthur Barnes 00:03:03.921
No question about it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:05.841
And the thing that I find so interesting as we look at the problems in New York City somehow or another we get some money and I think it's desirable that these men get rehired or rehire firemen and policemen. But we don't seem to get money to rehire teachers or to keep daycare centers open or to provide for drug addiction counselors and the like. Why is this and what are some of the things that we as citizens might do to try to deal with these problems?

Arthur Barnes 00:03:31.401
I think that that's an interesting question that you raised. Actually it's just a statement of fact, not a question because certainly that is what the reality is today. One of the reasons that we at the Coalition address those insoluble problems and let me try to enumerate some of our objectives for 1977. In '77 we're going to address three problem areas. One is in housing, one is in education, and the other is in an area that we characterize as community outreach. Community outreach is the area that's the catchall of the human services that you've just enunciated as parts of the problem. When you say why is it that there is not enough money in either city or state budgets to address the problems of poor people--I think that one of the reasons is a lack of commitment on the part of the legislators and a lack of organizational clout on the part of the victims of those decisions that cut essential services. Let me enunciate that a little further. As an example, the New York Urban Coalition has convened a New York State Task Force on Drug Abuse that is now in the process of trying to educate legislators on a city and state level not to cut the state drug abuse budget $9.6 million dollars. And with this description of this effort I think we'll get all of the elements of your statement in it, Roscoe. What has happened is that over the past three years in this one area alone, statewide, all of the drug providers, the drug abuse facility providers, have been cut 40 percent, and this goes across modality lines. The task force that we have put together for the first time includes all of the modalities, and heretofore they had been fragmented and fighting among themselves. You know the old argument.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:44.401
Divide and conquer.

Arthur Barnes 00:05:45.211
That's right. Drug Free is better than methadone, methadone is better than school prevention, and right on down the line. But now for the first time, the threat is so great that all of these modalities on a statewide basis have come together to address the problem, and the problem with--in caps--is that $9.6 million dollars is going to have such a terrible effect on our society within the state that not only are these drug program is going to be put out of business, but the drug addicts themselves, which who incidentally for the first time in many, many years, certainly since 1971, are looking for treatment in drug treatment centers. And there was a time in '71 when there were openings and there were no addicts that were attracted to the centers, and now for the first time, these centers are over their capacity, so that if they are forced to be turned away, then they go into the criminal justice system because to go back to the streets means to go back to drug addiction, which means to support that habit they have to commit crimes. And statistics have showed--and these are the state's own statistics--that shows that an addict that is not in treatment and who is involved in crime and who is free and our society costs the citizens of this state $25,000 dollars as compared to $2,400 dollars a year if they are in treatment. So to cut all of the drug agencies by an additional $9.6 million dollars means that all of us will be feeling the burden of these multiplied effects, so that our pocketbooks are going to be hit and hit time and time again.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:35.161
When you say our pocketbook, you mean to the effect of crime.

Arthur Barnes 00:07:37.832
To the effect of crime and to the taxes that we pay which must pay for the services either in a correctional institution or in a drug addiction agency.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:47.331
You see we have sort of a circle which goes back to a larger financial crisis in New York City. New York City's move toward fiscal stability has been handicapped somewhat by the fact that the state, which was providing a certain amount of money, now says that they can't provide that same amount of money. The state budget, which was beginning to approach a deficit point, is in a process of being cut so they can maintain the taxes at a certain level. So all of a sudden the state then says at least that it doesn't have money for these kind of programs, to with the drug program, certain education programs. So the question I want to ask you then is are you advocating that the state take money away from something else and put it into the drug programs? Are you advocating that the state increase its taxes, so that they can have the money for these with full recognition of the fact that when you increase taxes, at least in places like New York City and New York State, you tend to drive away business. So I'm really asking the question that deals with the whole circle.

Arthur Barnes 00:08:56.490
Well what you what you've just outlined is certainly the dilemma that, that the legislators and the governor faces. What I am saying in answer to that is that there are certain priorities that must be given to human services in this state and in this city. There is no doubt that there are claims on a limited amount of money that, and each one of them can be designated as essential, I'm talking now about Medicaid. I'm talking about social services, welfare. I'm talking about daycare centers and I'm talking about drug addiction agencies. To balance out each need against each other is a very cynical approach that our legislators, and in fact our government officials, from the governor's office right down, are adopting. And I think that this callous, cynical approach goes this way. In fact they have stated so to me in the Office of the Budget of the State when I was in Albany within the last week to discuss this terrible situation. When they were we were addressing the cuts in drug addiction services, when the budget people can say we don't care so much about the recidivism with drug addicts because they will go back to county jails and we don't fund county jails. We only fund the state facilities and then to me this. this is a perfect example of the cynicism that they view these very grave human problems. They tried, the legislators, in their political gamesmanship, try to balance out the demands of each group, each constituency. They say, they have said to the daycare people, we have pledged to restore drug addiction money and therefore we must take it from the daycare people. The daycare people then come to the task force, and say, 'why did you press your case at our expense?' The Medicaid people who have been cut, the Department of the Aged, who deals with those older citizens say, 'how can you give to the daycare centers and not to us,' so they play one against the other. And this is the kind of callousness that is exhibited by our legislators and by our public officials. My recommendation is yes, these essential human services should have high priority on our state and city budget and that each government agency must make economies within their own administration. If I were to tell you on a citywide basis that a group called the Education Priorities Panel has just started an analysis of the Board of Education's budget and found that there is woeful examples of waste and mismanagement within that department and that perhaps $30 million dollars could be saved from their existing budget, I'm sure you would be surprised. Now this kind of examination should go on in all of our city and state agencies so that the necessary economies can be made on the top, and therefore not jeopardize the kind of service provision that's given to our citizens who are in, so, such bad shape.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:16.040
I think that's a very eloquent defense of, or really an advocacy statement, of the needs for services people how this should be met. On the other hand it doesn't really square exactly with the economic realities of New York State. I read just the other day that New York State alone had lost 135,000 jobs in the past year, more than any other state in the nation. When you lose that number of jobs obviously you not only lose the income and the tax revenue from those workers, but also you create needs for additional service moneys. The suggestion that usually is given is 'let's go down to Washington and get the money' in order to provide the services. The argument about, as you presented about agencies serving money is almost exactly the argument that was directed at the Health and Hospitals Corporation, when there was the concern about replacing Dr. Holliman, that in fact he could have saved money and what in fact he says that, 'yeah maybe we could save a little bit', but basically the needs far outweigh whatever we could save through some administrative savings. So this really bring the right down upfront to the problem that has been facing New York City in the past year and a half/ Well namely the outflow of jobs and economic resource that in the past has made New York City the economic and financial and marketing capital of the nation, if not the world, is still continuing. And that same time, we have an out-migration of the people who are producing income, and an in-migration, because of the reputation that New York City has for providing human services and having a big hoard of people who require services. So we're almost in a Catch 22 situation. We have a situation where literally there is demand and need, actual need, for more service. Yet there's increasingly smaller amounts of tax resources and other economic resources to provide these services. And this is what has led some people to say, 'New York City is in a state of crisis' and unless it comes up with another way of managing its affairs, in all types of programs, in terms of the way in which it funds them, or the way in which these services are provided by funding, the city will not survive as a major city. How do you react to that type of analysis? Because I think it's an analysis that has been made frequently. Just before you answer that Arthur, I'd like to mention that we're talking with Arthur Barnes, President of the New York Urban Coalition. We're talking about the problem of New York City and some of the approaches that might be used in dealing with those problems. So maybe you can now respond to that particular Catch 22 dilemma...

Arthur Barnes 00:15:12.261
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:12.265
That we find ourselves in

Arthur Barnes 00:15:13.462
My response is certainly to embellish your statement because while it's been 135,000 jobs in 1976, in the past five years, it has been, it is total now of over 600,000 jobs that have been lost in New York City. And let's look at why that happens. Companies move out for various reasons. Nine times out of ten I think it has been proven that it is the executive administration that decides to move. And usually that's because of some personal reason, either they themselves live in Darien, Connecticut and find it difficult to get in, or else they hear that some of their employees are having difficulty using the subway, or they use another reason that it's very difficult to import high level management personnel into New York City because of the problems that exist within our city, and therefore they find a better climate when they go to the outskirts, whether it's Westchester, or in New Jersey, or Connecticut. Now this has been happening in an ever widening circle. Let's look at why this happens. Certainly New York City, if we say that, and as studies have said, that the chief problem for companies moving out of New York City is education--public education, or the lack of it, and crime. Now if we look at both of those areas, we find that these are the problems that are uppermost on the minds of citizens that live here and certainly through the publicity that New York City has received over the years through the media and television programs everyone looks at New York as Sin City. Now to some extent that is true. But as these companies move out because of these basic human problems that are found not only in New York City, but in every large metropolis of our nation, and I think the reason that they do finally move out is because these problems are not addressed in a concrete way by those who are making the decisions in our city administration and in our state administration. What I mean is this--that if we address the problems of the poor, we address the problems of corporations who bring business here and provide jobs here. If we have a cycle of high employment, if we have a top priority to get the best public education system that our money can provide, and you well know Dr. Brown that New York spends, New York City specifically spends, more money on education than the majority of states in this country. And yet we are turning out functional illiterates. Who is to blame? New inhabitants of New York City, when they declined to have their children go to our public schools. Who is to blame them for saying that the streets are not safe when in fact the streets are not safe? But just as it is their option not to come here. Those of us who are here with no options must suffer. Now certain things can be done, I believe, to rectify this because not only do we have the brainpower, we do have the resources. Even if our budgetary situation is as poor as it is, we are providing those services. We are not providing leadership. We are not coming up with innovative ways or creative ways to address these new social problems and our schools don't teach. Now those are the elements that we must deal with and I think those, that, those are the reasons that these problems are not being solved in any way, shape, or form.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:08.201
Well of course again you sort of elucidated and widen the circle somewhat. For example, in terms of the allegation that schools don't teach, it is certainly true that people who come to the city with diminished educational backgrounds for their age, not that they are unable to learn but thus far they haven't learned, and also have developed certain behavior patterns related to the way in which they adjust to the city, do put increased pressures on the schools. So what the schools have tended to do is to try to spend more money and get more specialists to deal with these problems and it's worked a little bit, but it really hasn't worked a great deal. And what the school authority will say, 'well look basically, it's a problem of the community. There's not enough economic stability' and then we bring the circle right on back to the question of economics. Now one of the things that you and I are both aware of and that is that Borough President Percy Sutton of Manhattan has announced that the candidate for mayor. He's probably the first black politician who has opted to challenge the political structure for the mayoralty, for the nomination and run on the Democratic ticket. To what extent do you think it will make any difference whether there's a black mayor or a white mayor, in terms of dealing with these problems until such time as we get a better social system, a better, I'll use the term 'management and planning system', which cuts across both the private sector and the public sector. To what extent do you think it'll really make a difference or do you think that it will make a difference, even as if just symbolically?

Arthur Barnes 00:20:55.630
I think that it will make a difference. But in that question that you just posed, there are many, many elements. Let me deal with the first one first and that was with the educational system, that the students, the present population within our schools, which at present count is 65 percent black and Hispanic because that population has changed and because they bring many problems that the system ,which was established at the turn of the 20th century, is not able now to deal with that. A lot of innovative approaches must be made at great expense. Now that certainly has the elements of truth but it doesn't tell the entire picture. What actually has happened is that we have created within the Board of Education a monolithic organization whose chief priority is its own self-perpetuation. The teachers as they have become more and more work men and women within the trade union movement has looked upon this new school population with their deficiencies and with their differences. And no one has added and with their strengths and creativity that they might be able to contribute if developed. And they look at them as individuals who cannot learn and therefore the opposite of that is that the teachers now need not make an attempt to teach. They are then involved in custodial care, merely keeping the youngsters with some semblance of order, however diminished that may be between 9 and 3. Now it seems to me that if this is the approach that we're using, the same old approach that we're using to education, and which we are not changing except for a few demonstration projects, then the end product is going to remain the same. The other part of the question is do you think that Percy Sutton's candidacy for mayor will make a difference and if he is elected mayor as the New York City's first black mayor, will that make a difference? Yes I believe that it will make a difference in two very important ways. Number one Percy Sutton is an eminently qualified candidate to be mayor, and if elected will be a mayor for all of the people of the City of New York. And I think that his record, in the, as the Manhattan Borough President for the last 12 years shows that. Anyone who has been down to the Board of Estimate seeing the leadership that he exerts there, and the the way his colleagues react to him and seek his leadership will recognize this man's outstanding ability. What's more important though, if he is elected mayor, is that his perspective of the problems of New York will be given a different and unique approach. I think that his set of priorities would be different because his perspective of those problems would be different than that which we have seen in many, many years, if ever in the city's administration. And that's why I think that as mayor he would make a difference.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:57.350
Well do you think that he has a chance to win?

Arthur Barnes 00:24:02.080
That's very difficult to prognosticate at this point.  I think that he has a strong, presents a strong candidate candidacy for the mayoralty race, and I think that if the proper organization and most importantly the proper funding of a serious candidacy for the mayoralty is made, then he has an excellent chance.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:25.150
You also are well-known in the community as one of the so-called 100 Black Men, an organization of outstanding black leaders throughout the city. I believe you the president, the vice president of the organization.

Arthur Barnes 00:24:39.311
Yes I am.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:40.601
To what extent do these influential 400 some odd men represent a significant force for change for better in the City of New York?

Arthur Barnes 00:24:56.110
I think that the the 100 Black Men's organization is an important organization within the city because of the membership, which, do, whose mobilization provides the clout by which the organization speaks.  You are certainly aware of the fact that the organization is consulted on appointments on city, state, and federal level.  They are consulted when decisions are going to be made that obviously affect the black community, and their input is received when they become advocates for particular points of view that have impact on the black community.  The fact that these successful individuals have mobilized within this organization then provides an amount of clout in the power structure.  They are listened to and they are asked questions that affect the black community.  Now, the overall goals of the organization itself is to provide this kind of leadership.  Now what seems to me to be the source of solution to some of our minority problems is that this kind of organizational effort and mobilization must exist on various levels within our society, so that we become together, not only as a united black community, but with the other minority communities so that our needs are met by the establishment.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:19.930
But what about the allegation that black organizations that are essentially middle class like the one in black men, the organization 100 Black Women, tend to advocate things that are good for the masses, but not necessarily deal with them themselves.  For example, the whole question about education. Most of the middle class black people in Manhattan send their children to private schools.  In the case of crime, many of the spokesmen of these organizations are not as active as they might be in the campaign against crime, not you particularly because your organization has been one of the leaders, probably the leader, in the fight against crime.  What about this? Is there sort of a class difference that is diminishing the potential leadership role that these organizations might play in mobilizing the black community?

Arthur Barnes 00:27:19.770
I think that the black community in New York City is no different than any other ethnic or racial group. We are Americans and as such there we are subject to the class distinctions that all Americans have been subjected to. I think that we should have a clearer view of what our mission is because our responsibility in the middle class to the underclass is greater in the black community than it is in any other ethnic group. Since we have been traditionally low men on the totem pole none of us can ascend that ladder of success without helping and bringing his brother up. And when that message gets across, blacks in New York City and in the country will be more unified to solve their problems.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:07.711
And with a man like Arthur Barnes articulating that message in leading the Urban Coalition, I really do think that New York City has a hopeful future. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Arthur Barnes, who is President of the New York Urban Coalition, and we've been talking about the problems of New York City, potential solutions to the problems, the upcoming candidacy of Borough President Percy Sutton for the mayoralty of New York City, and the role of organizations like the 100 Black Men in helping to deal with the problems of the black community and New York City. Thanks again Arthur for being our guest.

Arthur Barnes 00:28:38.671
My pleasure.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:40.110
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.  "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.  Please join us again next week.

