Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.450
During the 1960s and 70s Black filmmakers moved into the forefront of independent filmmakers. Hear William Greaves, independent filmmaker, discuss the future of black films on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:34.071
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thoughts. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:01.020
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is Bill Greaves, who is the owner, director, manager of William Greaves Productions. And as we said at the top of the show independent filmmaker. Glad to have you with us tonight, Bill.

William Greaves 00:01:13.382
It's nice being here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:14.941
Well, we talked about the fact that Black filmmakers are really moving out as independents. Let's begin by talking about the major outlets for Black film producers today.

William Greaves 00:01:26.340
Well I-I guess you could say that the main outlets--there are three of course--I guess they refer to all filmmakers as television...non-theatrical distribution and theatrical distribution. I guess you'd have to say that Black filmmakers get a lot of mileage out of both television and non-theatrical distribution. They--we are much less able to penetrate the whole theatrical feature film marketplace. That's a much more difficult exercise for us. But...a number of black filmmakers have made quite a number of documentary films...all over the country and a number of these films have found their way onto television.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:22.830
Yeah, one of the things that we've talked about on "Soul of Reason" in the past with people from the theater, people from films, and people even from the field of journalism, is that the major media outlets still are not accessible to Blacks at the same proportion as they are to whites--a reflection, in my opinion, that racism exists in the society--but more than that, the fact that we really haven't penetrated the market enough to have some friends at court, which will help to hook us up with some of those good contracts.

William Greaves 00:02:53.940
Well it-it's quite true. I mean we're--you know--we're talking relativity, really. I mean it's relative to what it used to be...When I say that...we're getting our films on television, when I say we're producing films not theatrically, I'm speaking in relative terms--relative to what it was, say, 10 years ago, relative to what it should be. You know it's-it's just a drop in the bucket frankly. The... when you think of the fact that there're only really I think two or three network Black television shows, for example, shows that are

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:31.874
--You mean the "good times"-type show.

William Greaves 00:03:33.270
Yeah--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:33.272
--And they're not really produced by Blacks.

William Greaves 00:03:35.630
--No no no [crosstalk] I was thinking I was thinking No I was thinking of shows like Black Journal and that sort of thing--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:40.381
--which itself has run into its own funding problems

William Greaves 00:03:42.761
right. But so

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:43.631
that perspective on the news...[crosstalk]

William Greaves 00:03:45.141
Right. So that--it's,it's a, you know, very sad situation. I guess you call it "benign neglect theory"

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:54.821
and it's not so, and it's not so benign. [laughter] Personally I think it's purposeful that somehow or another the media establishment has not really become aware of the critical skills of people like yourself. The analytical skills, the production skills, the creative skills...and by doing some of these independent films that we were stressing --doing some of these independent films--you help to develop a high level of awareness.

William Greaves 00:04:24.541
Well I think--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:25.171
--a lot of people who do make these decisions and maybe in another 10 years we will see William Greaves producing something for some of them, one of the big mass producers.

William Greaves 00:04:37.140
Well I tell you, I don't think--I think they're fully aware of, for example, our existence certainly. I mean it's-it would be very difficult for them not to be aware that we exist there. The problem is that what you're dealing with is a whole legacy of attitudes that have sort of filtered down, you know, through the years, through the decades, that well since slavery...I mean they went at the time of the emancipation of slaves, there was a tremendous vilification campaign that was launched by the anti abolitionists against the Black man, the Black person, and that vilification campaign found its way into all of the media.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:23.122
As a matter of fact, the film that really made American motion pictures "Birth of a Nation" [crosstalk] by D.W. Griffith had some of the most vicious stereotypes [crosstalk] that have been shown in films and those stereotypes were carried on for at least another 40 years--

William Greaves 00:05:36.760
That's right--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:37.211
right into the 40s--

William Greaves 00:05:37.851
That's right. So you have it, you have it, you know in films you have it in radio, you have, you have the legacy of all of this, you know, still with us so that today it may not be as virulent as it was at that time, but it comes off as either benign neglect or as a conscious avoidance of subject matter relative to the Black experience, or it comes off as simply reinterpreting the Black experience to suit the particular needs of-of those people who are essentially hostile to the interests of the Black community.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:15.790
And of course this gets into the content of Black films. You know what do Black film makers have to work with as content. For example, you could go out and work with so-called white content and be just like everyone else. But because of your Black experience as a person because of your commitment to projecting it your content tends to be Black and then you get the question is "Is it too Black?"

William Greaves 00:06:38.650
Well yeah, I-I think that, the...whole thing becomes a little complicated by the fact that a Black filmmaker like any Black person is on the one hand a Black person in a racist society, on the other hand as a human being in the world. And I think that like some of the films that I'm interested in have to do with, you know, problems that are not necessarily directly connected with the racism that we face here in America-- problems and pollution and the like. But on the other side of the coin are films such as "From These Roots" and so on that I have done, which very specifically address themselves to our very most important concerns and it is difficult sometimes--and not sometimes but very often to-to get the kind of sponsorship for those films that we would like to get in order to disseminate that kind of information.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:37.030
Well let's talk about "From These Roots." So this is a film that your company made, it has music by Eubie Blake, it has some really exciting personalities in it. It's narrated by the well-known Black actor Brock Peters. Tell us something about the genesis of the film, what it tries to do, and how well it's been received.

William Greaves 00:07:58.450
Well it-it grew out of some discussions held between people at the Schomburg Center and myself and some people over at Exxon. It--it seemed that to the people at Schomburg, to people like Gene Hudson up there, that this whole period of the 20s in Harlem had somehow or other been just passed over too many times and something should be done about it. And we were approached to research it in some depth and see if it were not--would not be possible to construct a film which dealt with that whole period, and we did a lot of research, we went all over the country culling photographic materials and other documents from collections--universities like the Dillard University and Howard University and Yale University and the Schomburg Center of course was a very important resource for us in the event as the institute--a number of different collections we approached and put together what is now the film "From These Roots."

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:13.301
Now when you make a film like this, since most of the personalities--I'm looking at your brochure here--practically all these personalities that you have in the film, are, are dead. Langston Hughes, Josephine Baker, recently Duke Ellington, W.B. Dubois, Conti Colin, Marcus Garvey, Claude McKay, Paul Robeson. Some of them just died within the past year or so. Arthur Schoenberg himself, Florence Mills... in doing this obviously you have to deal with still pictures--

William Greaves 00:09:40.631
Right--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:40.901
and still lives--

William Greaves 00:09:41.561
Right--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:42.311
at the same time you want to you want to bring it to life....[crosstalk] ...you wanted to say something. Now you have a man like Brock Peters as one of the fantastic voices in show business

William Greaves 00:09:50.382
-that's right-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:51.131
to narrate it, but what else do you do--

William Greaves 00:09:53.320
Well we--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:53.741
to make this film come alive?

William Greaves 00:09:54.601
Well you get a genius like Eubie Blake.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:58.211
Like you.

William Greaves 00:09:58.212
Well thank you very much. But you get somewhere like Eubie Blake who is you know who's got to be-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:04.091
He's one of the real great people in the world [crosstalk] 93 years old and still performing. That's performing-

William Greaves 00:10:08.861
That's true-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:09.551
Newport, New York, probably better than ever before in the past five years-

William Greaves 00:10:13.180
You know, but the interesting thing about Eubie Blake is that not only is it quite a feat for him to be alive and functioning, you know, at the age of 93, but much more important than that to me is as I said at the outset, his genius. This man sat down in the studio with me. We screened the film for him twice and within two and a half hours he completely composed all of the music from start to finish for that film, and performed it. I think I mean that, that has to be genius. I mean he, he rea-and if you hear the score - I mean you've seen the film - it's a brilliant piece of work.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:54.780
Well as a producer, that must have been one of the real highlights of your life, because when-

William Greaves 00:10:59.281
That's right-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:00.360
you work in show business a few times where everything comes together [crosstalk] you see genius working-

William Greaves 00:11:05.341
That's right-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:05.991
It's like watching a pitcher pitch a ball at ballgames-

William Greaves 00:11:08.151
That's right. There you have it, it - I guess you'd have to say it's genius plus that long, a number of years, all of that experience, 90 years. Well he's been playing I think since he was eight, since for eighty five years he's been playing piano and composing.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:22.830
Well how was the film received and how can groups that want to use the film get an opportunity to use it?

William Greaves 00:11:27.660
Well the film is being incredibly received frankly. It's won that's, you know, 19 International Film Festival Awards. And it was initially targeted to high school seniors and to college freshmen. But as it turns out it has such a wide base of appeal that we find for example corporations purchasing it now. We find it being purchased by history departments, literature... English lit departments, sociology departments, political studies, urban studies...It seems to, ah, because of its very nature, have an attraction for a wide range of educational disciplines. And for cultural or community groups as well who are, you know, just simply interested in the Black experience.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:20.020
So if anyone wants to use this film to get in touch with you at William Greaves productions.

William Greaves 00:12:24.210
Yes, they're- we're at 1776 Broadway if I may say that, and it simply would write us a letter and indicate that they are interested in renting or purchasing the film and we'd be very pleased to see that they're attended to.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:40.260
Well, in doing a film like this I'm sure you must've gotten a lot of satisfaction. And of course it's catalyzed some other ideas for you. What are some of the other ideas that you're thinking about now?

William Greaves 00:12:50.670
Well we're working on...several projects. One of the projects that we're working on is a - well we've already done it - It's a pilot for a series that we're hoping will be funded by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. It's a series on the Black experience. The pilot, it's called "Just Doing It." And as a matter of fact it won an award here at the second annual New York Black Film Festival. That pilot we shot in a Black barbershop, down in Atlanta using Cinéma Vérité technique and that is one of our projects, of course we did "The Marijuana Affair" with Calvin Lockhart, and we're hoping to get that in the theaters shortly and we're working some other feature film projects that we want to get going.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:42.981
And a way for Black filmmakers to make it is to keep coming up with creative ideas.

William Greaves 00:13:48.151
I think so, I think, I think that that's very, that's very important and crucial in getting financing, that you have ideas that will, you know, get backing of some kind. Well I'm sure with your genius and your thoughts and your success that you will set the pace for Black filmmakers, and that as the future moves along, as we face the future, we talk about Black filmmakers, we'll be talking about some great films done by great people like Bill Greaves. We're talking with Bill Greaves of William Greaves productions tonight on "Soul of Reason," and we're talking about independent films and independent Black filmmakers. And as we all know, Bill, any of us who are Black who are involved in the media have a whole myriad of problems. Let me ask you what are your problems [crosstalk] beginning with the most important and then moving down the line. But I think they are all important, because if you don't solve all these problems, you don't have your film. Well as they say out there in the streets, "don't ask." [they laugh]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:52.341
OK

William Greaves 00:14:53.882
What are my problems... I suppose you have to say that...my problem, again, is the problem that all filmmakers face, but it comes to an extreme when you're thinking about the Black filmmaker. And that is the problem of finding adequate funding sponsorship for either my documentary films or for my feature films. We're now trying to get financing for a feature film that we want to do with Lola Falana and...possibly Calvin Lockhart or Bernie Casey and Anthony Quinn or Gregory Peck. These are the people that we're shooting for, for this feature film. And we've moved around to the major studios - to Universal Pictures, to Paramount Pictures, to various other places - and we find that it's difficult, you know, getting the financial backing from the established sources and...now we're undertaking to looking at alternate sources of finance...with the film that I did with Calvin Lockhart "The Marijuana Affair" we were obliged to get financing from that - from the West Indies, from some West Indian businessmen, and I think that the the Black filmmaker...more and more will have to think along the lines of I guess people like Don King who, who has looked at the Third World as a, as a resource for financing of product that is in the interests of the Black community but which finds reasonably I wouldn't say hostile reception in this country but an indifference in this country. And...so that I think more and more Black filmmakers will probably be taking trips to Africa, to West Indies, to Japan, to all kinds of places in search of money that they have been unable to get domestically for the financing of their productions.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:07.579.9999999998836
Yeah having had some experience myself trying to raise money for creative projects, through the film projects you come aware of the fact very quickly that the film business is a very high risk business. And as we've talked on "Soul of Reason" about Black investment in plays for example, Black investment in other creative products such as art, there is a tendency for Black people to think that Black Americans who have money to [crosstalk] be very very cautious with it-

William Greaves 00:17:32.773
Well that's another part of the forest. I mean Black-Black Americans that are nouveau riche, they just recently, we've just recently sort of- "they" because I don't have any money but-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:43.821
Collectively, Black people don't have any-

William Greaves 00:17:45.740
Right. I mean just recently have Black people come close to the kind of money that we're, we're talking about and they are, I hate to say it, but they're essentially conservative. They have no track record, no experience really in the whole business of high risk investment, and they're not about to-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:05.390
Well, I would have to say if your portfolio is only five million and you're going to invest a million and [crosstalk] you have to have at least a one out of, [crosstalk] what, nine chance of losing it [crosstalk] because even your-

William Greaves 00:18:17.061
Sure, sure. Well in feature films--I mean when you think that--I think something like 2000 feature films really are produced a year and out of that 2000, maybe a 100 to 2 -- [crosstalk] really, 200, you know, hit the streets and there over one hundred thousand features that are being promoted and developed and you know the statistical probability rate of return is very very very low indeed.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:40.251
Which then moves you in the direction of...group financing through social organizations, church groups possibly-

William Greaves 00:18:49.032
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:49.941
West Indian nations [crosstalk], you know, Caribbean nations, African nations. [crosstalk] But that is a problem. And of course one of the advantages I think you have in your own company is that by doing some of the documentary type things which have much lower budget [crosstalk] and can be bought by corporations [crosstalk] or groups. It keeps you involved in the film business. [crosstalk] It pays the bills. Well it doesn't do that type of really hit film that every one of us is in business wants to measure.

William Greaves 00:19:17.930
[Yeah. Right. Right. Sure. Sure. Oh yeah.] Sure, well that's quite true, I mean one of the, one of the reasons why we did go into distribution was because they became very quickly apparent to me that unless we had some alternate means of revenue, we would have a problem, and additional to that is the fact that, we produce a lot of subject matter that a lot of the established white distribution companies are not particularly interested in disseminating. And I as a Black person, I'm very interested in disseminating and so we aggressively go about the business of appraising the educational community, for example, of the existence of certain materials that we've done, which we feel would be of use to Black and white students and the like. So we sort of killed a couple of birds with one stone there: Both the financial problem as well as the problem of disseminating the kind of subject matter that we feel more and more communities throughout the country should be receiving.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:21.391
When once you crack that financial problem, and we really have it, [unintelligible] things we've been talking about, but at least once you get some money for the production, what are your major production problems?

William Greaves 00:20:33.710
Well, by my major production problems do you mean technically or do you mean...?

Speaker 14 00:20:40.830
Well, two things: One is when you do advocacy and creative work there's always a conflict between the political message advocacy and the creative product. Also, when you work on low budget there's always a conflict between what you'd really like to do and what you can afford to do. [crosstalk] And those I would think are significant problems for anyone who's in the creative milieu.

William Greaves 00:21:06.470
[Yup.Yeah.] Yeah well it's true that, you know, when you get the sponsorship for a film very often the sponsor wishes to interpose themselves in to the whole creative process and somehow-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:23.771
I mean they paying the bills-

William Greaves 00:21:24.561
That's right. That's right. So what I try to do I've kind of worked out a, some kind of a formula that I approach my sponsored films with, and that is I try to find out what it is, first of all, that the sponsor is trying to say. And then I try to find out what parts of what they are trying to say that I really fully agree with, and what it is that I'm trying to say.  And the area of overlap between what they're trying to say and what I try to say, that area of overlap is the area in which I make the film, for the most part. And I just...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:00.540
Ignore--

William Greaves 00:22:00.542
Well no I don't ignore because you can't. But I try to centralize the film in that area where we are in absolute agreement. That's where I try to make the films. I don't always succeed because you have to make a film as it is financed, only because the financing will remove itself and you have no film. So that's a problem.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:26.690
But doesn't that lend toward a, tend toward a bland product?

William Greaves 00:22:31.370
Oh yes. Absolutely- [crosstalk]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:31.971
Because I know a number of filmmakers, black and white. [crosstalk] Some people will say, "Look I just won't do this. [crosstalk] If you buy me, you buy this approach," and that's it. [crosstalk] While on the other hand, some of them are starving too. [crosstalk] Although some of them are very successful. Now what you're saying is that you look for a middle ground, and basically that's the technique that Black people have long used [crosstalk] in an advocacy situation to find a middle ground from which we can move out [crosstalk] and then develop our message.

William Greaves 00:22:57.920
[Sure. Yeah. Right. Sure. Yeah. Right] Well I'll tell you, one of the things that I find is very helpful is the whole business of excellence, I mean in the production, that is we have a good track record in producing high quality films. And because of that, it's very difficult for a sponsor to argue too much with us on a particular point, because they say, "Well my goodness, you know, the man has won over 40 film festival awards. He's won the Emmys. He's won, you know, all kinds of things. I mean, we-he must know what he's doing. And if he tells us that that isn't good for the film, then we've got to pay attention." So I think this whole business of really trying to develop oneself to the point where the work is really quite good, it's very critical in this whole exercise.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:44.930
I'm really glad you said that, because one of the themes of "Soul of Reason," as we examine various facets of the Black experience, is excellence. And one of the ways in which Black people are going to make their mark and accomplish what we are trying to accomplish through our advocacy, is excellence. And in my opinion excellence does not mean doing it "the man's" way necessarily. It doesn't mean giving up your advocacy and your straightforwardness. But it does mean [crosstalk] doing whatever you do as well as you can do and then probably a little bit better.

William Greaves 00:24:15.230
[It's a power tool] Yeah it's a power tool, and I think, I mean, the classic example of this of course is the, both the Japanese experience and the Jewish experience. I think in both instances you have a people who do things very very well, and as a result they are able to have a lot of leverage in a lot of situations.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:35.791
And in a sense Black people do have leverage in a number of areas, particularly areas like sports and entertainment. We have not utilized that. [crosstalk] Because we haven't brought it together with the financial and the technical which leads me to ask the question about the other major problem, that is getting Black technical people, people who are sound people, and camera people, and editors, into the process. That's something I personally mentioned and [crosstalk] I think frankly [crosstalk] every Black person who's in the business [crosstalk] is interested in.

William Greaves 00:25:04.050
[That's right. Sure. Sure. Sure. Yeah.] Yeah well, yeah. That's, that's a real problem because the name of the game there is not only, you know, going to a film school or a television school and learning, but is the problem of, you know, developing a track record of employment and that, there you have the whole spectre of equal employment opportunity and the problems that are attending to that. I mean, we have been discriminated against over a long - throughout history, and it's only recently that Black technicians and the like are beginning to be used in the media. And a lot of Black people who are talented, who would make superb cameramen, superb sound people, they simply don't get that amount of action, and it's difficult for a producer to give action to a person who really isn't good. And it becomes a really vicious circle- [crosstalk] a very vicious circle.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:01.340
Although, the weight on those of us who are Black in the business is a little bit heavier because not only are we supposed to be producing a product, but we are also supposed to be passing on our skills to other people.

William Greaves 00:26:13.280
That's right-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:13.831
Then how do you do that [crosstalk]-

William Greaves 00:26:15.360
And that becomes very difficult because then it, because we as a Black company have to be able to compete against very - very often against white companies for a lot of films that we do. And if we, if- We really got to watch our quality, you know, and it's one of the areas that, I mean, I flog are the people that work with us. I mean, I really am a terror, I mean, some of them will tell you, in terms of making certain that the work that they do is high quality work. And it's it's very difficult to accept the fact that this field - Black, or white, polka dotted - it doesn't matter. It's a highly competitive field, and you really have to be really good.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:03.471
And also I think it's a highly judgmental field. It has its subjective judgments. [crosstalk] What's good to one group might not be good to another. [crosstalk] There are certain basics [crosstalk] of such a thing-

William Greaves 00:27:14.711
You've got to be in focus-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:16.391
You've got to be in focus [they laugh] You've got to have on the same suit or dress in the same scene that they shouted [unintelligible]

William Greaves 00:27:23.061
[That's true.] Although you know, I tell you, you could say that, I mean, if the content were very interesting, we mentioned this now as matter of fact, because if the content, if the subject matter is really strong enough, very often it can override the worst possible flaws imaginable, you know- I've seen some [unintelligible] films with some [crosstalk] terrible flaws [crosstalk] that kept you right on the edge of your seat. [crosstalk] But it's a great film- [That's right.] That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:47.001
Well, for the young people in our audience who are listening, how do young Black people get this type of training?

William Greaves 00:27:53.510
Well I would suggest that they approach places like the National Education for - National Education Television School over at WNET, Cliff Frazier has the community film workshop, there are the, of course, University film departments - to start off by going through those courses first. They - Once they've done that they should then try and make themselves available as apprentices to companies throughout the city on either a part time basis, or either try to get some kind of funding to get into these film schools. But then after that, then they hit the job market.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:37.101
And with people like Bill Greaves out there doing it, they get a chance.

William Greaves 00:28:40.531
Well, yes, some of them do. Not all of them, but some of them. [laughs]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:43.741
Okay, our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Bill Graves of William Greaves productions talking about Black films and independent Black filmmakers.

