Speaker 1 00:00:02.050
Drug addiction is one of the major problems in our inner city communities. On today's Soul of Reason, hear how the community oriented drug program of the Harlem Team for Self-Help educates the Harlem community about drugs.

Speaker 2 00:00:38.390
This is Solar Reason, a program that will examine the roots of the black thought solar reason is produced by the Dubberly one B.C. Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro American Affairs at New York University.

Speaker 1 00:01:05.220
With us on today's Soul of Reason is Nat Davis, assistant director of Kodak. That's the community oriented drug education program, which is part of the Harlem teams for self-help. Glad to have you with us today, Nat. Glad to be here. Now that Kodak is a mouthful and community oriented drug education program is also a mouthful. But since drugs are such an important problem, you know, inner city communities, what you're doing there is really very interesting and very significant. And I'd like to begin our discussion by just asking you how this program came about. And what are you really trying to do with the program?

Speaker 3 00:01:47.660
Well, basically, I guess you can say the program came about because there is there's always a need for education in Harlem on any level. But as far as the drug thing goes, we felt that there wasn't there was a lack of education in the areas that we felt were important, which were more social than drug oriented, which leads to the drug problem.

Speaker 1 00:02:12.380
Now, when you say we're more social and drug going in it, what do you mean by that?

Speaker 3 00:02:16.730
Well, take, for instance, the age of addicts. I think in the last, let's say, five years has gone down. It's a younger age. So that only indicates one thing to me, that it's starting in the home more or less from the street into the home and then back out again. And I think there has to be some education of the children in the home and also re education of the parents, especially in the ghettos. When you say education means education about the dangers of drugs or about the things that lead to it, about what they can do about it. Well, all of us, I think. I think you say all of those really, because I've found that when I call it tunnel vision of most people in and in the ghetto when relating to drugs. I often asked myself if if a person is not educated enough to get away from what he sees every day, I don't think he can make a really true, honest choice about whether he wants to do it at that. And I don't think too many programs, educational or rehabilitation, can really get to that point. And we have to get into the home to do that.

Speaker 1 00:03:28.700
And when you get into the home, what do you try to do in the home?

Speaker 3 00:03:33.390
Well, see, in a lot of areas at least, Kodet staff have thrown the book away. You see, you can't there is no set procedure. What you do when you go into a home, because there's are so many problems in the in the normal black home that are normal to black people. And I don't think a structured way of attacking something like that can be really answered. You know, I think you have to whatever you find there, you have to deal with immediately.

Speaker 1 00:04:02.660
Yeah, I agree. Although from a logical point of view, you say there's so many problems that are normal to a black home. If they're normal, that means that most people have them. So that's there must be a few approaches you can use. Maybe you don't use the same approach. Could you give us an idea of some of the types of approaches that you would use?

Speaker 3 00:04:21.380
Well, one is to get the family communicating with each other. That's that's that's one of the main things we try to do. But also, we try to alleviate some of the pressures that keep the communication from happening in the first place. That's another approach. And pressures like what I would keep communicating pressures like maybe the parents not really wanting to involve themselves with the with with the thought of their children using drugs, which in Harlem, it's always a possibility. No matter what how they feel about it. So what we try to do in a lot of instances is re-educate the parent to that fact. The kids know about drugs. We don't have to educate them about that. I think what we have to do is get some kind of communication between the children and the parents. And I think this is where the church is working closely with the church comes in very good, because I still think that the church or the black church and the storefront church is a very viable contact to the black people.

Speaker 1 00:05:20.570
Now, when you say the kids know about drugs, you mean they're aware of the fact that they're around them all of the time. But do you. Do they know about each individual drug and what it does to them? Or in your opinion, does that matter really?

Speaker 4 00:05:36.700
Well, that's that's another area that we work in. They don't really know what it does to them. They they don't know what goofballs, so-called goofballs will do to their bodies. They don't know what heroin really will do to it. They know it will get them high. That's the one main fact that they all know it's universal, but they don't really know. We weren't known. I asked 136 all of two weeks. A short while ago. And it was surprising to find out that most of the questions we got were about how does the high feel, not what it does. And it was it was funny because no one really cared about what it did to their bodies. No one really, you know, as far as the goofballs were concerned, well, you know, they sell them, you know, how bad can they be? So it's a thing, I think that, you know, after being very surprised at what we explained to them, what it does do to them, to the mind, the body. You know, they they were really taken back, you know. Well, how could something that gets you high. Do that to you, you know? And it's that kind of astonishment that it shouldn't be, you know.

Speaker 1 00:06:47.760
And when you go into the schools, for example, basic, your technique is to rap. Well, to talk informally with the students. I gather you don't do much lecturing.

Speaker 4 00:07:00.030
No, we don't. We actually we do more listening. I think we do more listening than we do do. Rapping even, you know, because I think that's that's something that a lot of educators I think I'm gonna have to start doing, too, if they're going to educate in drugs especially. And that's listen, I don't think it's so much of of telling. They know it. You know, we've beaten drugs to death. We've had papers. We've had analysis. We've had surveys. You know, I think it's time to stop and listen to what they're saying and maybe we can formulate something and say back to them now. How do you set up your listening sessions here? Again, listening sessions, usually when we go into a school or an organization, access to come in, we usually find out just what the people are about first before we go in, and then we set something up accordingly. Now, when you say what they're about, you mean what their objectives are, how they organized. Not so much organization and not so much objectives as much as personalities. You see, if if we run into a situation where a purse, there's some classes that are very, let's say, up on what's happening, they're very alert and they'll they'll relax questions. And when that we can have a more formal type group. And then in other cases, we have a group that really would like to play that that period. So we sort of play, as you say, but at the same time, we're educating because we we we form it that when I play. What do you mean? Well, we might have we might act out roles. We might have a constructive criticism group or a debates, but split the class up and have one for it and one against it and then switch it around and have a market for those type things. They get a kick out of that same time. You know, it's helpful to.

Speaker 1 00:08:45.930
Now, you also do a lot of work with churches. As a matter of fact, the churches are involved, in a sense, helping to sponsor your community oriented drug education program. Exactly what are the churches do and what how do they see their role?

Speaker 4 00:09:02.220
Well, basically, the idea came out of the proposal to involve the church to the extent where we would get referrals from. That was the original idea. Antivirals, referrals? I think so. Families and drug addiction problems, period. You see out of that came a very a very good thing because we got not only referrals in that area, we got other referrals. As far as information, you know, what could we do if we had this problem, things like that. And it also gave the pastor of these individual churches that we work with, it sort of gave them a leeway, because I think in a lot of instances, the church let's say the churches dialogue cannot confront a problem of drug addiction with without stepping, let's say, out of their religious roles. So we might come in and it might be very unreligious tactic that it might be a very unreligious tactic that we might do to help that family or that that's just to be a little facetious.

Speaker 1 00:10:11.730
If religion has to do with making men confront his environment and himself, what tactic would in fact, be unreligious?

Speaker 4 00:10:22.730
Well, philosophical question. I know it's, uh, I'm getting I do. But in a lot of instances, you're either talking about religion. Are you talking about the man that's but that is representing the religion. And I think. A lot of cases, this is what we have to think about sometimes some ministers, and I'm not taking anything away from him. Just don't have they, you know, personally, they don't feel they can use the language. I use the tactics that say an ex added can with a drug problem. And this is where I'm saying that the difference is not so much in the religion.

Speaker 1 00:10:59.460
Now, you've mentioned XRX. I gather that the program itself, the Kodet program, is not to rehabilitate addicts, per say, not that rehabilitation isn't important, but the purpose is really to get the community, as you say, oriented and involved in trying to prevent drug addiction, that is trying to keep the young people and anybody else who might have the inclination to become involved with drugs from becoming involved. And you mentioned ex addicts, which would then suggest to me that some of the people who work in your program are exotic.

Speaker 4 00:11:40.380
They are. They are. We find that. And here again, I'm saying I believe CoLab is unique because we really threw away the book from the beginning. You see, we hired people that on that basis. I was hired on that basis. It was the basis that the multiple needs of of a drug education project in the central Harlem area needed that that that complex makeup in their staff with the Hotton in the will to do what the proposal said. Now, I'm not taking away anything from organization. I think it's great. But a lot of disorganized things in Harlem, I think, have to be attacked. Originally from that that that premise that it is disorganized and an organization and a third party will not change it. And I think this is something we have to get away from. So what I'm saying is that if if the community itself is if the program that's that's servicing the community is made up of what the community is made up. I think we have a better chance of at least getting 50 percent of what you want to do. Done. And in this area, we have we have successfully done that. You know, we have a woman that knows everybody. You know the number. She know the negative and the positive M element of the neighborhood we have. We also have black associations involved. We speak at various schools in District five area. You know, we're quietly doing something I think should be done loudly.

Speaker 1 00:13:12.420
In other words, you're trying to create a community feeling community spirit against drugs and drugs is something that you shouldn't get involved with because it's gonna hurt you.

Speaker 4 00:13:24.290
Well, hurt the community again. Again, part of our our our thing is that the only way that can be done is to broaden the scope of what's in the community. I mean, let some light in and let some light out. We think that's the only way to do it. And I believe if if most if most teenagers in Harlem had the choice of standing on 116 street or maybe taking vacation to Europe or even knew what that was all about, it might make a difference. Not too many know it. And I think that's where where it really lies. But we can't approach it on an intellectual thing. We have to approach it where it's at.

Speaker 1 00:13:59.670
Now, when you say let light in that light, that light out, I would suggest to me that in addition to just talking about drugs and having people's attitudes develop, we talk about other things. And you give opportunities to the young people in the community to do a lot of things. They have no relationship to drug education specifically at all.

Speaker 4 00:14:19.440
Exactly. We try to play down the role of the drug. Really, I think too many people talk about the drug too much. It clouds the issue. Last year, we had 10 ministers taking part in a very comprehensive drug education program at Northside, run by Dr. Pneuma. And it was a it was a it was a good experiment because we're doing the same thing this year. But we invited people from the community to take the course right along with them. It was a noncredit course. They were certificate's handed out. But the idea is they went from the physiological effects of drugs all the way to the human aspect. And I think these ministers in their congregations, they have a need for this. And I don't think this was ever done before. So that's the type of thing that we think will start opening up some avenues. It's not so much giving them their our idea of what education is about, as much as just letting them know the problem that they supposed to be educating for. And that lets the light out, you see. And of course, light comes in. So that's what I meant by that statement.

Speaker 1 00:15:26.340
That's a very beautiful philosophy. Do you extend this into helping to provide recreational and self development? Activities and opportunities for the young people you've become involved with?

Speaker 4 00:15:41.020
Well, of course, we have a summer program, a very comprehensive summer program that includes trips, pool, swimming, basketball and the like. But really what we're into and where our heads are at is small economical groups of kids, not so much to buy baseball and bats, but to get invitations from Dun and Bradstreet for a visit to Fort or to find out how the money world is doing and what supports their government. Things like this. We have two such groups like that now and hopefully next year we would like to to get something worked out with one of the exchanges to to maybe set something up like this, you know, to maybe really make a proposal or something in that order. Because, you know, we we we really can't play baseball or basketball life. You know, we've got to get into the mainstream with what's happening. That's the only thing that's going to let that light out.

Speaker 1 00:16:38.650
And do you get involved in any job placement? Because I know many of the youngsters in the community do have economic needs and do want to work. And sometimes the unemployment gives them that extra time, leads them to fool around, experiment with drugs.

Speaker 4 00:16:53.680
Employment is very, very important. Last year we had a fairly good program. It wasn't enough. It's it's never enough. But now I understand we don't even have that due to the Nixon cuts. But I, I personally think that work alone in the summer would go a long way to stem a whole lot of what's going on, especially down the summer. And who knows, doing the summer if you save 10 kids to a late summer and that's 10 more that say, well, I got a job, I made a little money and I did some they came in contact with somebody or maybe touched somebody that summer and sort of changed them around. I think it's all worth it. So it's not only sitting back waiting for somebody to give us the money to to offer jobs. I think we have to create our own really, you know, and some one of the economical groups we have now are doing just that. You know, they're trying to they're going around washing cars, washing windows, escorting old ladies at night. We had a little dance one night. We got ninety dollars. It's that type of thing. Eventually, they hope to get a building. Eventually they hope to create their own thing. It the whole thing is modeled after, let's say, junior achievement, but with more emphasis on what's happening in the ghetto is the analytic junior achievement would agree with me that shining shoes or maybe running down the corner to get a six pack is really working. But this is what happens. And I'm saying the negative side comes in with the positive.

Speaker 1 00:18:19.660
I think even some people in junior achievement remember the days when they used to do some of those kind of things. And one interesting thing that came up in our conversation before the program is that I believe you said this is the only prevention program sponsored by AGW Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

Speaker 4 00:18:36.880
No, no, no. Department, Health, Health, Education and welfare funds. I believe I don't have the number, but it's about 100 and some programs around these United States. Now, is that supposed to be prevention program prevention? Primarily prevention programs with focus prevention. I believe we're we're the only one in New York. I don't know how that breakdown is made up. I don't I haven't seen it. See that we were recently cut. We were saved with the cuts. I really can't give you that figure. But AGW W is our primary funder.

Speaker 1 00:19:15.320
That would be really interesting if it's true that your program, which is an excellent program, is the only one in New York where a goodly proportion. Not necessarily a majority, but a goodly proportion of the Addicks are. It's kind of interesting that so much of the emphasis and its emphasis certainly should be on rehabilitation, but so much of the emphasis on rehabilitation and such a miniscule part of the emphasis is on prevention. What's your observation about that? Why do you think that is? What can be done about that?

Speaker 4 00:19:51.410
First, I'd like to correct you that there are other prevention organizations in New York. What I'm saying privately, that AGW, that funded source. I don't I don't think. I don't think rehabilitation is is is gonna say it all for us. And what I'm saying is that prevention programs, interventions should should really be private, privately funded. I think much is just as much emphasis put on rehabilitation. I think more should be put on prevention because this closes the gate. The knowledge closes the gate on the rehabilitation, you see. And if we have to keep going down, we can't go up. I think methadone is proving something to us right now by just taking further steps to further something like that. We have to start back. We have to go back, throw some books away and say this is where it's at prevention. The prevention organizations that are out here that are out here now I don't think are funded. You know, it's a built in failure clause with most of Maine say funded. They're not adequately if they're not adequately funded to do the thing that they think the things that they should. Literature should be created. There's no there's no literature in Harlem area that relates even in a small way to Harlem. The movie should be done. Tape should be done. All kinds of things that are just not done. Everything is slanted the other way. We're not trying to stop it. We're trying to maintain

Speaker 1 00:21:23.940
It was interesting that you pointed up the key of your program, sort of reaching the inner circle of the family and the inner feeling of the individual. And I believe you said that knowledge is a part of that, but isn't necessarily the most important part of it. So then the question is, how do we get around this idea? And I've heard this before, that we need more relevant materials and brochures and films, etc., which basically are sort of not knowledge oriented. Or you're saying that these materials and films should go beyond just the knowledge and begin to deal with the psyche and the feeling that the individual has about himself and his community?

Speaker 4 00:22:06.660
Exactly. This is what I'm saying. I'm saying that a film that's dealing with, let's say, the ghetto should project together. I'm saying that there are no plush shooting galleries. I've been in them. I've seen them. I've smelled them. There's nothing nice about it's a very ugly situation. I think this should be should be shown most definitely. And I don't think that what relates to one addict necessarily leads to another one. We're lumping too many things together, too many personality and too many physical things involved. You know, to say that Bednarik is going to act that way. We have to individualize.

Speaker 1 00:22:44.850
Actually, what you're really developing is that so much of our emphasis is on rehabilitation and even law enforcement and so little of our emphasis is on prevention in the sense of actually telling it like it really is getting the people in the communities where it's really happening to become involved in the the education and the and the prevention. And what you're opting for I caught up is opting for is much, much more emphasis on prevention than presently exists.

Speaker 4 00:23:21.780
Most definitely. We think we think that the TV tube should be a spot commercial should be used. We think there is no mode of education that we we haven't thought of and especially working in the Harlem area. You get so many opportunities to find out different ways of communicating the message of what's happening that we just need outlets. That's all we need. We need the people that that that really want to sacrifice and come on out for education instead of rehabilitation or methadone or some other makeshift make shift thing. I'm not I'm not selling rehabilitation down the river.

Speaker 5 00:24:00.690
I'm just saying that I think more emphasis should be put on education, not just to give us an idea of the approximate cost of something like this, approximately. What is the Kodet project funded for the Kodet projects funded for one hundred four thousand eight hundred four thousand on a yearly basis? That has to be renewed and probably we would need 20 or 30 Kodet type program. I'd say one hundred and one hundred. In other words, you're talking about instead of one hundred thousand dollars each time, something like ten million dollars or thereabouts or maybe even more or more. Right.

Speaker 1 00:24:35.280
But the point that you really developing in code up is really about is extending the word of the knowledge and the awareness of the drug problem and what it means to the individual personally, far beyond the place where it is now exact. You're suggesting also that the mechanism for doing this are not set ABC programs, but programs that have to rely on the flexibility and creativity of your staff, people and people who. Involved in the community?

Speaker 4 00:25:07.720
Exactly like I say, when, when, when, when the hiring an interview was done, it was done on that basis of the person. Not so much whether they had the educational ability, so much as much as whether they had the heart to to to really make judgments in that way. Could they actually say, well, like we have a reverend, let's say if he ran into a problem, could he say, well, I can't handle this problem and let me give it to one of the fellows that X Addicks or something like that and let him do his thing? Could could have an ecstatic give his ego up enough and say, well, listen, I can't handle this. This is a church problem. Let me give it to Reverend Downey. This is the type thing we were looking for, this type of thing we got.

Speaker 5 00:25:50.950
And I think it's proven very successful. How many people do you have on your staff? We have 11 and counting myself. And these are full time people who are involved in various aspects of working with community groups, schools, neighborhood groups, black associations, churches and so on. Exactly. And I gather that the impact of the church is very, very great, because in a sense, this is one place where you can selectively tap a large number of people in the black community. Very much so.

Speaker 4 00:26:22.000
Matter of fact, that that is one of our our best results out of the whole program is that we came closer to the church, which to a large portion, a lot of people think that the churches like in their own bag. But there's a lot of young ministers out there now that put their heads in the right place. And it's a very good thing.

Speaker 1 00:26:43.720
In other words, you really think that the Harlem community in particular, as a result of your program and other efforts of a similar nature, are really going all out in terms of fighting drugs?

Speaker 4 00:26:55.570
I think they're really trying. I think they really trying, not only trying, they're doing something and they just need a lot of help.

Speaker 1 00:27:01.990
And that's what caught up was about giving them that help, hopefully. Okay. I'd really like to thank you for coming with us on the sole reason today. Thank you. Dealing with this really tough problem. And I think your approach in terms of involving the community and involving the family and involving the church and using flexibility, personnel and staff is the type of thing that we all need to know about and probably in our urban communities we all need to deal with. Thanks again that Davis of the community oriented Drug Education Program for being our guest on today's Solid Reason.

Speaker 5 00:27:38.950
Thank you.

Speaker 2 00:27:41.200
You've been listening to Soul of Reason with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, and featuring a distinguished guests voicing the black experience sort of reason is produced by the W. NBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro American Affairs at New York University. Please join us once again next week.

