Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:00:01.650
With a budget of 5.1 million dollars the New York Urban League attempts to serve the many needs of the minority peoples of New York City. Here Horace Morris, executive director of the New York Urban League discussed the programs and needs of this important organization on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Speaker 1 00:00:38.641
This is Soul of Reason. A program that will examine the roots of the black thought. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:01:05.730
With us this evening on Soul is executive director of the New York Urban League. And we'll be talking about the program's activities problems and concerns over New York City and the league.

Horace Morris 00:01:15.030
Good to be with you Dr. Brown.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:01:16.771
All right let's begin right off by talking about what the league is trying to do in terms of the many many problems we have here in New York City.

Horace Morris 00:01:25.580
I think probably the most significant thing that the New York Urban League can can do in New York City is to serve to identify the many many problems that black and minority people face in New York City and to develop hopefully a broader and a continuing community awareness of those problems and to demonstrate new and innovative ways of attacking or approaching the...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:01:51.401
We've been saying that for 30 years and the problems have been getting worse. Why do you think that's the case?

Horace Morris 00:01:57.390
The problem is that what we really need to solve these problems is I guess a national kind of dedication to do that. I think we saw moves tremendous moves in that direction doing great society era of the Johnson and Kennedy administrations. But what we've seen since 1968 is a I guess a retrenchment or a sort of going back to the times previous to that when there wasn't the national commitment to resolve these problems.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:02:26.990
There was one of the things that some people have said is that maybe even at national commitment of the so-called great society was some eyewash and that they were really trying to put a finger in the dike. And what happened after Martin Luther King's assassination is the dike just collapsed and that there's little activities there that looked good and sounded good really were inadequate and there really has never been and is not now a national purpose to make things equal for minority people.

Horace Morris 00:02:59.200
I've you know I I would tend to to to agree with that. I think that some distinction has to be made. I think as to what the approaches were and what the approaches should have been to resolution of many of these problems I think doing during the 60s the approach was through community organization what the anti-poverty program with its cat programs organizing poor communities to help themselves. I think in a sense in a way that was sort of a tragic kind of situation because poor communities can do very little to help themselves when we talk about the economic conditions that they face what poor communities need more than anything else jobs and better education and jobs and better education the result of an economic system that I think has to be designed to to better meet their needs. I don't know whether we have approached that yet and I would tend to agree also that even in the 1960s there was there was not the totality of a national commitment that will be needed to resolve these problems.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:04:07.281
Because you hit a very important point where you emphasized jobs because in the 1960s, 1970s even going back to the 50s we had a change in the nature of the economy where we worked with basically a labor intensive industry where you needed hands to plow the fields and to turn the machines and the plants. As we go more and more toward a technological society a society which depends on computers and and ideas these large masses of people who were collected in our urban communities and in our farm communities to plow the land and to turn to machines and to shovel the coal really became excess.

Horace Morris 00:04:47.190
That's right, and most of those...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:04:47.580
And our society really hasn't dealt with that issue yet.

Horace Morris 00:04:50.820
You're so true and most of those people that you describe happened to be black and poor.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:04:54.660
In past generations they happened to be European immigrants but they have now moved upward into some of these technological and unionised craftsman like industries and people who are in those cities who work in those garment plants and who sweep those plants and lift those boxes tend to take care people's children and so they tend to be black and Puerto Rican and our society doesn't have a balance. If you just look at the unemployment rate. Double the rates in the inner cities and if the official rate is 7 or 8 percent the unofficial rate is probably 10 percent. That means in my minority people it's upwards of 25 and 30 percent of our people. Among our teenage youth 60 and 70 percent unemployed and and you have a problem that is not going to be solved by a Band-Aid.

Horace Morris 00:05:42.060
You know I think one of the problems that I think sort of stands out as a result of our effort in the 60s was this that we developed a whole new span of new jobs. In other words anti-poverty type jobs you know of people who were working as paramedics or paraprofessionals and all that sort of stuff. Some of that stays with us Community Organization type jobs that were developed as a result of the anti-poverty program. Or jobs just have just plain disappeared. What I think what happened during the 60s was that we developed jobs that could not be sustained over the long haul

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:06:21.600
Without federal funds.

Horace Morris 00:06:22.470
That's right, without federal funds. You see the community corporations here in New York City who who employed many of the people that we're talking about who developed that whole new spectrum of jobs. They're just folded. You know and then here are people who have a skill that that is not marketable at this point. And they are people who are unemployed and people who are as you describe who are among that that tremendous group of unemployed that many of us just can't catch and count at this point.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:06:51.120
Well your job as executive director of the Urban League is to mobilize the programs and the budget for the programs to try to ameliorate some of these very serious problems we've been talking about. So maybe you could tell our audience something about some of your programs and also something about some of your problems other than money because we pointed out you have five point one million dollars but that's really a drop in the bucket in relationship

Horace Morris 00:07:11.430
Really a drop in the bucket.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:07:12.451
to what needs to be done.

Horace Morris 00:07:13.440
I think that the most important thing that we can do as an organization and I say we I'm talking about the New York Urban League is to keep the community first of all aware of the problem. What happened so many times in New York and in other other places is that the community just forgets that there are poor people around that there are black people and minorities.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:07:32.690
I'm sure you don't mean the black community, you mean the larger community particularly the business community

Horace Morris 00:07:37.321
The business community where all the money is and I think what we what the Urban League has to do is to keep that larger and that majority community aware that the problems are still with us. One thing that we attempt we've attempted to do and again utilizing federal funds Seta funds is develop on the job training situations where we will go to the business community and say look let's develop a six or an eight week training program in a particular occupation that we will recruit and do some preliminary screening of people to refer to your business so that we can train them on the job. Now we over the past six or seven years we've conducted that program, first of all I guess using Department of Labor money. It's call a lot of different things it's been named DTA. Now it's Seta and all that sort of stuff and we have developed these on the job training situations at the rate of about three or four hundred per year. And we've been doing this for six or seven years another thing that we try to do another project utilizing Seta funds is we conduct a Harlem manpower program that we we we are particularly proud of up in Harlem where we work with people who have language problems and we help them with English as a second language. We also will develop job opportunities in mostly women in clerical situations for them. Another another program that we that we worked with very carefully and over the past four or five years is our open housing center which provides housing services under contract with a number of the major corporations here in New York City as they recruit and bring in minority personnel particularly black. We try to open up and find housing opportunities for them. You probably read in the New York Times just over the past couple of weeks or so where we are working along with Commissioner Eleanor Holmes office and the U.S. Attorney General's office in identifying real estate brokers in New York City who continue to discriminate against blacks and other minorities. They try to find better housing.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:09:43.480
Of course as you run down this litany of things that you're doing it brings to mind you know just what is the purpose of the Urban League. You know the Urban League was founded back in the early nineteen hundreds coalition of white business people and black social leaders to look at discrimination and employment and education and housing health and now you have to make a decision as to how do you program and allot your activities and your energies because obviously as we talked about the racism in the society the economic problems social problems there just are a myriad of problems that affect the black community many times agencies move in the direction of funds. In other words their programs are determined by where money is available.

Horace Morris 00:10:35.700
That's true.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:10:36.120
Yet on the other hand the Urban League doesn't completely have that luxury because you have to be concerned with areas like housing and like education where they may not be a lot of money. So I'd like to ask you just how do you make your decision as to what's going to be your program. I imagine you have a five year plan like every organization does. Number one you have to survive.

Horace Morris 00:11:00.362
That's true

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:11:00.901
That means you have to raise money to survive and to have a Horace Morris, to have an administrative staff you have to have money. You also have to have money for publicity you have to let people know where you are. But at the same time you have to do something. So you have to have money to do that. How do you make those hard decisions?

Horace Morris 00:11:17.440
Well historically I guess since 1910, the priority effort of the National Urban League movement has been in employment, opening up job opportunities for blacks primarily back in the early nineteen hundreds for those blacks who migrated from the south into the urban centers. That's how we got the name the National Urban League. Presently there are about 106 affiliates of the National Urban League around the country and our major thrust our priority effort has been and will continue to be employment opening up job opportunities for blacks and other minorities. And then another major thrust of ours has been education the two sort of go hand in hand. The New York Urban League for instance conducted a Street Academy program for 10 some 10 years. We still have one as opposed to 15. About five years ago where we worked with dropouts and potential dropouts one of the major reasons why we have one as opposed to 15 five years ago is because the corporations that supported the street Academy program began to withdraw their support.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:12:20.010
Now that really gets into a real crucial problem for a social agency like the Urban League. It's supposed to demonstrate and lead particularly when you articulate with a white business community you say these people that encourage you to do this program and it was a very successful program dropped their support. To me that's unconscionable. If they really mean that they're going to change the situation rather than put a Band-Aid on it. How do you deal with that type of problem? I know you face it all the time.

Horace Morris 00:12:46.230
What we really have to do one of our major efforts as we demonstrate a successful approach to resolution of a problem such as with the education of minority youth high school youth in particular is to try to impact upon the institution that is supposed to be serving that segment of society. We we have worked very closely with the Board of Education. We continue to work with the board of education and to to serve these youth and to say to them we've found new and different ways of meeting the needs of this particular population. Now we haven't been very successful in converting the Board of Education but that doesn't mean that we won't continue to try.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:13:29.890
That is your intention. Now briefly if anyone in the audience is interested in supporting the Urban League the New York Urban League who might they contact how might they support you.

Horace Morris 00:13:39.601
Well they can support us in a couple of ways. Number one with money, funds, membership. They can contact us at Fifteen Hundred Broadway and here in New York City, New York 10036. That's the New York Urban League and they can take out a membership in the league. They can also offer to volunteer. Our phone number is area code 2127305200.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:14:02.730
As a reminder tonight we are talking with Horace Morris who's the executive director of the New York Urban League. And we've been talking about your various programs and I know as a borough as a city wide organization you have to deal with all of the boroughs of New York City. So how do you do that? Because New York City is like a country in itself there's 7 million people.

Horace Morris 00:14:22.580
It's it's like a state actually. What we we've structured ourselves I guess over the past three or four years on a borough basis whereby we have offices in all the all five all five of the boroughs in New York City: Staten Island, Bronx, Brooklyn, and Manhattan. And our approach to programming the New York Urban League is that our borough offices are located where the action is where the people are. On Jamaica Avenue in Queens, on 136 Street in Manhattan, on Dean Street in Brooklyn, Victory Boulevard in Staten Island and what we try to do is to encourage our borough offices each of them have their own advisory boards and that sort of thing to study the problems in their immediate areas in the in the boroughs and come up with program activities and program ideas. For instance in Staten Island we operate two daycare centers because there was there was a demonstrated need in Staten Island for daycare services for for black and minority mothers. In Brooklyn we operate a summer lunch program which is one of our major efforts where we will serve well, last year, well over a million lunches and an eight week period to youngsters throughout Bed-Sty. In Queens we work along with the Youth Federation and work along with other organizations, community organizations, in Queens to support and assist them in developing program activity.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:15:46.260
In a sense it appears that in some ways Urban League is a catalytic organization. It stimulates ideas and responds to needs in the community and then I imagine you have to go out and get funds to do these things.

Horace Morris 00:15:59.850
Basically. You're right. I think the most important thing that we can do is to demonstrate that there is a particular need. Get other groups and other organizations in the community and the boroughs involved and in meeting those needs and hopefully the Urban League to spin out of that. See we can't be everything to everybody that's for sure. We can sort of mount an effort sort of as you say be the catalyst get the community get other folks involved. Stick with a particular program effort for three or four years and then get out of it. I think one of our major efforts has to be citywide and on the borough level too is that of advocacy. You know I guess I'm sounding a little repetitious but we have to continue to be an advocate for the for our constituency and for the people that we serve. And that's the most important thing along with getting other community groups involved in what we what we're all about.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:16:52.261
Well in order to do this we said earlier you have to have general funds as well as earmarked funds. Do the corporations support the Urban League as much as they did in the past and also what other sources of funding do you tap for your general administrative overhead?

Horace Morris 00:17:12.599.9999999998836
The answer to corporate support as now as compared to 10, 15 years ago is no they do not. You recall quite vividly how during the 60s when we had all the social upheaval and unrest that corporations were I've heard it described a couple of weeks ago they were tossing money over the wall, you know to in the general direction of black folk you know because you know there was so much difficultly that that stopped. That just didn't happen anymore. We gather most of our financial support first of all from the Greater New York fund as you know there are corporate members of the fund and they we will press I guess next year will be the largest recipient of of funds here in greater in greater New York from the Greater New York fund. We also have a fundraising agreement with the National Urban League. They happen to be located here in New York City and we have some turf problems once in a while. So we have an agreement with them where we they provide us with about a hundred and forty thousand dollars a year from the funds that they raise because there are certain this fundraising agreement restricts us from contacting certain organizations, you know, for funds. And then most of our program funding of our budget of 5.1 million dollars, 4 million dollars of that is funds that are restricted for program Seta funds funds that come for our from some we still have some corporate support for our Bed-Sty Street Academy and the Chase Manhattan provides some summer intern money for us as does City Bank and that sort of thing to do special kinds of projects.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:18:53.770
Well this is a problem every advocate agency runs into and particularly where the economy is down corporations feel they can't put as much money into it. The problems in the community on the other hand go up.

Horace Morris 00:19:08.221
That's right they become larger.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:19:10.251
Problems become larger and every group, you know, the hospitals are concerned, health groups are concerned the youth serving agents' are concerned

Horace Morris 00:19:19.800
And you add to that the fiscal plight of New York City.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:19:22.621
Right so that that does make it more difficult, but that suggests then that in the long haul over the next 25 or 50 years we have to begin to look at other ways of providing human services. One thing that did occur during the 60s is that a number of people did say to the corporations look you're trying to do too much for us let us do it for ourselves and we did have a lot of self-help groups that got started but eventually those self-help groups ground to a halt because they too needed money. And the question is how do you get it when there really isn't enough money if the black community nation is eleven percent of the population or in New York City is 25 percent of the population we certainly don't have 25 percent of the gross national product of that particular part of the economy so that it is not really totally realistic to assume that black people or Hispanic people are going to be able to support these programs on their own which means we have to look for other models.

Horace Morris 00:20:27.120
I think another...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:20:27.631
And I'm sure you've thought about that.

Horace Morris 00:20:29.071
Another significant thing and I think two is this that during the 60s when many of the self-help groups emerged. There were you know tons of money poured into providing them with just the financial wherewithal to do something. There was very little effort devoted developed to develop the expertise that these groups really needed. You will recall that all of the management and fiscal problems that many of these groups from around the country developed because you know lack of understanding how to handle taxes and the tax situation. And you know their employee benefits and that sort of thing. All the money did was create problems for them. Probably what was needed along with the infusion of money was some infusion of of of of the development of managerial ability and skill and whatnot. That's one of the major problems that we've had I think and we continue to have that and I think it's important that we we recognize that one thing that has caused the Urban League to hang on and to actually grow during this period of economic downturn is that our approach to structuring and administering all of our affiliates is is a professional approach. You'll find the Urban League is considered a professional social service agency around the country and for the most part those people who head up our 106 affiliates are people with MSWs and who all have their masters in education or public administration or something similar to that. So what we've tried to do is to to develop a sort of professional approach to meeting the needs of blacks and other minorities.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:22:17.520
I don't think there's any question that the Urban League has an outstanding professional reputation. The real thing that generated my question is that the needs of the community far outstrip the resources that...

Horace Morris 00:22:29.270
of any one

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:22:29.790
...any one organization. And we still have this essential question in society as to how are we going to meet the social service needs of our minority populations particularly in our inner cities. The communities can't do it themselves. The corporations can't or won't do it. We tend to look with great anticipation to a possible change in administration where the federal government will put in more money but it's all asynchronous. There doesn't seem to be an organized plan for dealing with these needs and maybe it's not even possible let there be such a plan. But my own view as an intellectual is that certainly there must be a way of dealing with this if we put our great minds together.

Horace Morris 00:23:14.801
One thing we have not determined or decided to do in America is to say that every family in America in our country is entitled to a minimum income. Every family in America is entitled to a decent safe and sanitary home. We've said it but we haven't done it. I think New York City is a classic example of what needs to happen in this regard. New York City and New York State has tried to pay the tab to providing Social Service, the social services needed by blacks and minorities. And you just can't get them. The city and the state didn't have the money to do that. So I think it's a national problem. I think we we we need a national income maintenance program. We need a national program that will that will take over from the states and the cities that their welfare programs and fund those and finance them. I think it has to be a national effort because I don't think any state in New York is probably one of the richest states in the union can afford to meet the social service needs of its people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:24:24.000
Well let's look at it. And I happen to agree with that very strongly. Let's look at another aspect of that particular problem which is the work job problem. Many times when the economy gets tight we come up with public service job programs and they amount to picking up trash or cracking bricks on a street or something like that. But in fact there literally are millions of jobs in hospitals and schools and in youth agencies and in environmental protection agencies which need to be done. There isn't any dearth of work to be accomplished in our urban communities. What there is is a dearth of money or an unwillingness of society to put money in those terms. So is it not conceivable that in another 50 years we might actually have urban cores or urban job programs that are not programmed just to keep people busy but are programs to meet the basic needs of society? People who live in these communities particularly as our society gets older we have more health problems, we have more recreation problems, people have leisure, people live longer. Have you as you think as a leader, you're a significant social leader, given some thought to this or do you talk it up because I know you have the short range problem of making that 5.1 million, 6.1 million, but as a social leader of social responsibility you also have the responsibility to look ahead...

Horace Morris 00:25:52.441
Let me say

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:52.981
...possibly even beyond your own lifetime.

Horace Morris 00:25:54.660
In a sense when we look ahead I also look back in this regard and I can recall as a young boy growing up in New Jersey there was a program called the Civilian Conservation Corps the ol' CCC and there were many guys from my neighborhood who went into the Corps. They used to come home with these green uniforms and we're very proud. They were proud of their uniforms. We were proud of them and what they did was to go into I guess the pine barrens of New Jersey they built roads the forests that had been burned out by forest fires they replanted them. They built bridges you know. In fact they even built a high school stadium down in a place called Palmyra New Jersey and we thought that was a fantastic thing and it was a stadium for Palmyra High School and there were many of these kinds of activities that were public works activities that were that developed jobs and provided services that were really needed by the poor communities and most of the people that the guys for instance that went into the CCC camps were poor guys black guys and other minorities who who needed jobs. And I think what we're going to have to do is to look at the development of public works jobs. There are as you say there's a tremendous amount of work that needs to be done in America and not just in the urban centers but all over. And we have the manpower to do it. But again what it will take is a national commitment and a national effort to do it. And I think it, well such an effort as that would have to be funded by the national government.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:28.770
But more than that in order to get this effort off the ground it is going to take the conceptual realisation of the idea

Horace Morris 00:27:34.092
Absolutely

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:34.531
and the articulation and the advocacy that you talk about

Horace Morris 00:27:37.320
The National Urban League has supported a public works program for I guess for the past five or six years.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:42.360
And I think that certainly it's true that there has been this type of support I think what I was suggesting is that all of us who are involved in advocating for blacks and minorities begin to put this into a larger perspective of society because it isn't just a question of what's good for minorities is good for minorities, it's a question of what's good for minorities is

Horace Morris 00:28:00.101
good for the the whole entire country, that's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:28:01.710
And that's really what it's about.

Horace Morris 00:28:03.241
Absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:28:04.091
Our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason has been Horace Morris, executive director of the New York Urban League and we've been talking about the problems of New York City and the way in which the Urban League and various creative approaches attempts to deal with these problems. If any one in the audience is interested in supporting the New York Urban League they should contact the New York Urban League at fifteen hundred Broadway or call 730-5200 to offer assistance, financial volunteer, and otherwise. Thanks again for being a guest on tonight's Soul of Reason Horace.

Horace Morris 00:28:36.230
Thank you.

