Speaker 1 00:00:01.390
It is generally agreed that black theater is the most part of the world of theater. Part of the exciting world of black theater is The Negro Ensemble Company under the artistic direction of Douglas Turner Ward. The NEC has just brought The First Breeze of Summer to Broadway following its success with The River Niger. Hear Doug Ward discuss The First Breeze of Summer on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:45.870
This is Soul of Reason, a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with The Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., Director of The Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Lee Brown, Jr. 00:01:12.660
Our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason is DouglasTurner Ward, writer, director, actor, artistic director of The Negro Ensemble Company and producer of First Breeze of Summer, which has just hit Broadway. Glad to have you with us tonight, Doug.

00:01:29.050
Glad to be here.

00:01:29.492
I know you are tired because putting a show on Broadway takes something else and then you've been working getting your film together on River Niger and so on, and knowing the history as you and I have talked many times of The Negro Ensemble Company, which is to try to make theater relevant to the concerns, needs, interests and feelings of black people and knowing what you did down there at St. Mark's Playhouse on 8th Street Second Avenue. And then River Niger trucks on up to Broadway and becomes a great success, wins all kinds of awards. Then you have another great play that has been such a success in your theater, St. Mark's Playhouse. You had that dilemma. Should you go to Broadway? Should you? Shouldn't? And you have resolved it by going to Broadway. So could you tune our audience in on some of the things that you're thinking about as you consider taking this play which you would talk about a little later on to Broadway.

Douglas Turner Ward 00:02:27.690
Yes, well Roscoe the... our experiences with The River Niger sort of marked a new step for NEC who up until that time had worked without going to Broadway or without being too much involved in the commercial theater. But times in our original our first two years for instance we had a big hit in Ceremonies In Dark Old Men and we made a decision not to move it at that time even though many people wanted us to move it to Broadway.

Dr. Roscoe Lee Brown, Jr. 00:03:06.590
And that was a great play.

Douglas Turner Ward 00:03:07.761
Yes. Yes. And we but we felt that at that early stage of our development that that would be looked at and thought of as a move that would would would. Would sort of reflect our aspirations to be on Broadway or to be a commercial theater. And we felt that in order to establish our identity for what we what we were that we we would not you know we would not move to Broadway. We would keep our company and move on to other things and we released the play. Well more or less five years later..

Dr. Roscoe Lee Brown, Jr. 00:03:42.990
You also did ceremonies on television.

Douglas Turner Ward 00:03:44.610
Yes, eventually we did it on television. But five years later when we did The River Niger, times had changed, and also the Broadway situation had changed. And that Broadway no longer was the quote Great White Way. It had in many ways become in some instances the great black way. And that moving a play to Broadway did not reflect departing from any any any any policies.

Dr. Roscoe Lee Brown, Jr. 00:04:10.651
And you can see that in the audiences.

Douglas Turner Ward 00:04:12.270
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe Lee Brown, Jr. 00:04:12.663
Because the audience in Niger and the audience in Wiz, the audience in Raisin basically have been predominantly black.

Douglas Turner Ward 00:04:19.589.9999999999709
Yes. And we helped. I think we helped to create that climate.

Dr. Roscoe Lee Brown, Jr. 00:04:25.261
Particularly with Niger. Because it was a black play, or is a black play, heavily about things that contemporary black people are thinking about.

Douglas Turner Ward 00:04:31.920
Yes. And ran eight months with practically 80 percent black attendance that kept it running. Well after this experience with Niger, we we had nothing principally against moving to Broadway because moving to Broadway represents to us merely a step which allows us to get more people. Our house downtown is one hundred and fifty seats. The First Breeze like Niger showed that there were many more people who were trying to get in to see it than we could accommodate. And that helped determine our decision to move it to a larger house. The second thing behind our our our thinking is that we've discovered that we need to continue to earn our own income, If we are going to survive. And therefore when we have a project or a production which shows that it has a wide audience appeal that could be a commercially rewarding from our black audiences then we feel that that that to continue to exploit those productions are crucial. Is crucial to our our survival.

Speaker 5 00:06:00.550
This was part of the dilemma you had with the NSC in general. Absolutely developed it mainly out of external funding and external funding sources said. Well how long do you expect us to continue to support something that you say your community will support in other words part of your thesis is that black people. People interested and concerned with the causes of blacks would support good theater if they get a chance to see it. Absolutely. Of course what Niger has shown and now a fresh breeze of summer showing is.

Speaker 4 00:06:32.660
Yes this will happen and of course the thing I mentioned frequently as we talk about theater on our show. So reason is that black theater is so exciting because it touches the basic nerve of blacks and the world. The dilemmas that we have to face and as the plays of move from more from a protest yelling out stance to more of an introspective stance I think that you've certainly attracted a larger black audience. And I do think that whites who view these plays are becoming more aware of the concerns and the sensitivities of blacks. I think the the the raw awareness of fact the discrimination and prejudice is wrong is out there.

Speaker 9 00:07:16.430
Now we are dealing with the time type of thing that you Neil O'Neal dealt with in terms of looking into psychically at the Irish type of things some of the Jewish playwright Arthur Miller have looked at in terms of Jews and now we have a whole range. Leslie Lee who wrote the first series of summer Joe Walker who wrote river Niger at Berlin's taking a Miss Janie. All of these folk are looking at. How the black experience through black eyes and putting it out there on the stage to be seen. So let's talk about fresh breeze of summer which is at the Palace Theatre Broadway and Forty seven street in the Palace of course is known for many many things.

Speaker 11 00:07:59.090
I just might ask how you happen to get into the palace because the palace is using it as a vaudeville there.

Speaker 12 00:08:04.620
Yeah. This is a very interesting story of course. The palace is owned by the needle lambdas who own Millbrook Brooks Atkinson where where Niger plays where a relationship at least with the theater owners. But everybody raised their eyebrows when the when the palace came into the picture because it had been associated with vaudeville and musicals that Midler and right.

Speaker 10 00:08:28.370
Judy Garland. Well we in looking at the available theaters we felt that if we could get the palace that it was it was the best because the palace was right there on on Broadway you know on the corner 47 Street.

Speaker 8 00:08:46.670
On the weekends when Broadway really becomes 90 nothing except the Great White Way. We felt that. Our visibility right there on on on on on the great black way would allow many of our potential black audiences who would would come by and walk in just like they do with the movies. So we sort of thought about the palace not so much and traditional theater terms but more or less the things that that that that would attract the audience that we're primarily trying to trying to get. And I think if you go by that you will see. That our marquee is almost like lit up like the you know the movie marquees. Our display is a little different than the usual theater display. And. The other question was everyone's say well what what about a straight play an intimate play in a big house. Well looking at the theater we saw that that that the House is very intimate has a very intimate sense to it and that I felt as the director that the play wouldn't lose anything. We'd played Niger on on the road and some see it as that that hill up to two thousand three thousand people and it worked very well Niger's a very intimate place.

Speaker 9 00:10:07.720
Yeah it's very scary and both both of them. But I think that anyone in fact last night or the night we you know open June 10th and the preview all of the people who have seen the play before were sort of awed. By the fact that the show fitted so well.

Speaker 10 00:10:25.430
And did not lose any of it any of its intimacy and that sense and that is it's it's the variety of movement and the places that are played and everything else that the play fits into the palace as if it was meant to be there.

Speaker 9 00:10:39.850
You know I can imagine that I saw the play while I was down at NBC and one of the performances you had as a benefit of the Robeson's Foundation. And naturally you're right there. Yeah well practice which is marvelous. And I happen to personally know a number of the folks in the play and it is a remarkably touching experience. Frances Foster's performance. Yes Grandma is really just something that if anybody has ever known a black grandma you would know that this is the feeling and then of course the intensity of what was happening in this interaction.

Speaker 13 00:11:17.690
So possibly you might reflect on what was the main theme or thesis of first breeze because we've already identified that it revolves around the prototypical black grandma called Grandma in the play but it deals with some other themes which you weave in and I might say that the way in which you played your role was just out of sight where this guy comes in with his pointed toe shoes to make love to Grandma in the younger days.

Speaker 14 00:11:45.920
Just something really right out of the past. Well the as you said earlier in terms of as black writing and black theater has sort of moved. Past the what I consider at that time maybe a necessary period of the protests the confrontation drama the the conflict primarily between blacks and whites aside as they move sort of. Past that.

Speaker 10 00:12:13.460
And became more introspective as you as you said the writers began to look at a wide variety of black themes that in the do not have only a peripheral relationship to the conflict between black and white the first breeze of summer is a very difficult play to pin down in terms of any one thesis or theme. I don't consider it a thesis play but it it in in looking at this family this black family. It sort of operates on two levels. I mean it is the day in and when the grandmother is suddenly it's almost like a swimmer who's who's who's going on and drowning begins to see the whole their whole life flashes before their eyes and she begins to remember her life and particularly the main aspects of a life with her relationships with three men the first lover who was a true love when she was a young 17 year old girl a a white lover who she encountered at a point of a very a vote of great vulnerability when she was working in the household and became involved. And finally the character that I played the the aspiring Minister but who is also beset with his own pull between his own sexuality and sensual sensual feelings and she begins to to to to remember these three crucial.

Speaker 14 00:13:52.130
Affairs in fact only the fares in her life and the play gives this view into the contemporary scene and the like. Yes there's a set and then he is going through these reminiscences and that's one reason why I can see being on a palace stage is an invalid mom as you can move yes from one particular setting over to the other is just as open in two different places.

Speaker 12 00:14:11.960
And the other concurrent themes revolve around the young grandson who has idealized his grandmother like we all do you know he's perfect. Yes he does not have a human frailty absolutely directing the play I always tell actors well we all know that our parents never did it. I mean we are we. Virgin birth. I mean they never did the things that we all do.

Speaker 10 00:14:33.470
And he has idealized her to the extent that it's an on real attitude about her. He thinks she's perfect in everything else and suddenly he's beset with his own growing into manhood and the tensions created and his values and his aspirations and and all of these things so he is a crucial. He's faced with a crucial problem. And eventually when he discovers the truth about some of grandma has been in relationships with men that sort of becomes enraged and attacks her and there's a great scene in which between the two of them then there's a third theme which relates around the father who played by Moses. Yes a self-made man who has risen from being a plasterer to having his own business and his attentions as this man who's trying to adhere very strenuously to suppressing his his potential violence his angles at the world. And to try to to to make it was a business primarily with white clients and at the same time being almost criticized by his older son for being almost verging on being an Uncle Tom and his business relations and all of these then the wife. I mean there's a multitude of characters who appear in this play and we get almost a a perspective on almost three generations. The grandmother the the father and the mother and the mother of the young the two young boys and we get a perspective on all of these generations in a black family. And it finally culminates what in what I think because I think the play to me. Overwhelmingly is a remarkable woman's play. I mean it is the perspective. That finally the grandmother when we look at it even though there are certain things we made uncomfortable like that white relations a lot of audiences get uncomfortable by. But finally went at the conclusion of the play. It resolves itself in the sense that this woman was a very heroic. Woman. But she was a very human person. She had a needs and she was a good person. And yet she was she was she was complex and that we we finally get this not a sentimental lives view of black relationship and black love but but a resolution where there's no blame but just an insight deep insight into the lives of the very particularly the grandmother and all of the people shown in the play including the character who I play who. Wow. On the surface seem to be constantly constantly contradictory between his pull between between call a God and the call of sin. And right. And yet he's he's a sincere man. I mean he he this this sort of rigid you know this rigid rigidity in him eventually leads to his own self-destruction.

Speaker 11 00:17:45.490
I mean he does some some brutal things finally in the play because as I was watching the play and knowing you Doug what I could see this character in and I could see behind it I say well you know that's Doug. I could see a lot of things behind it now. As a director I want to ask you how do you think this role would have come across as someone else other than yourself what it played because the role was so much Doug Ward.

Speaker 6 00:18:09.930
Well that rascal I think I think I.

Speaker 12 00:18:14.710
I'm not saying this this egotistical anything. It's just the way I work as an actor. Eventually when I play a role I mean Niger ceremonies Harper and first Brees I. At this stage I try I reached the point where I don't think that I play a role anymore I saw on a roll a bit tonight I saw it inhabit the role which means that if someone else has developed this role or the it may be different the these the scope of the character might be the same but the actual flesh an embodiment of the character might be different I think that I have more confidence in fact I'm not going to be playing the role throughout the run I think I have confidence in other actors playing Oh I'm sure and I'm not going to compare you know what it would be a different role being a guy. It's it's almost like the how one act would play Othello. Yeah as another actor would play Othello as a director.

Speaker 8 00:19:06.680
When I when I will direct the actors back and will replace me I'm not going to direct them to be me. You know it's not that I will try to find that within him which what he brings to the role that is that you know that is that fits the the the interpretation of of the character. It will be it will be quite you know maybe quite quite quite different. And I don't think that while I try to to play the character with a conviction and I will try to get any other actor to play with the same conviction with actors are different. They may bring different things to to it and yet still be you know be be justified and valid. I don't want the public to think that that when I you know when I play these roles that finally you know they can't be done by you know by anybody.

Speaker 13 00:19:59.530
But it's a tremendous amount of interest psychic tension in the play and in talking with the young man whose name is Reno who plays Lew the young boy. He was telling me how but before the performance he has to more or less good take himself out away from everyone and begin to Psyche himself into this because the last scene in particular is a very emotionally draining scene. It's emotionally draining to the audience and I'm sure it must be emotionally draining to the actors. How do you how do you feel as a director or what type of feelings you get about theatre you direct to play like Niger which is basically a political it has a family heavy family theme that basically it's more of a socio political drama and a simpler and more of a subplot.

Speaker 15 00:20:50.020
So I think the family the family is there is the key but the the plot is this ice case is the the ultimate gang is is political.

Speaker 11 00:21:00.850
In other words you know this man must be black and proud he wants to identify with Africa he wants to identify as saying to make us as a people three as against a play like first breeze is where it deals with how a family in our ranks among each other's a society is racist by particularly shown by the relationship between the grandma and the White boss who working for and the father and the White business people that is trying to go but other than that the rest of it closes in very tightly on the family.

Speaker 13 00:21:34.760
Now as a director how does this the difference in the backgrounds of these plays affect the way in which you go about helping your cast to develop helping to project the play.

Speaker 6 00:21:47.080
The first thing is is is is identification and sympathy and empathy empathy with the people involved. We as black performers particularly and realistic drama call upon to represent the lives of a wide spectrum of black people. And it is our professional responsibility artistic responsibility to have both the the insight the intellectual insight. Into their their lives and also to identify with them fully.

Speaker 15 00:22:27.280
My first thing as a director is it is basically to find the common ground between the particular performer and the character that he is that he's as that is playing and eventually that's that's entering the common ground between the actor and the actor's own personality and the atmosphere the character that he's portraying. Yes. Let let me just explain because I probably could clarify more because of what you meant about Reno in terms of my approach in terms of Harpo. Harper. I bring myself. To Harpo yet let's say the values you know the fundamentalists.

Speaker 6 00:23:10.120
Rigid religious values Harper possesses are not necessarily intellectually my own. However. I look at him totally from his point of view. Now how do I do this. I have a wide range of experiences I have I have I have my own family my own father happens to be very a Baptist you know devout Baptist I mean I would say almost fundamentalist. I know the world I know the sincerity I don't care what what how you would would in an analyze or interpret these people's beliefs I believe that this the honesty and sincerity of it is there my responsibility as a performer is to not try to to look at these characters from the outside. And to select ways of depicting them from outside. I must enter into it from their own their own their own mind how they view thing their own point of view and consequently in the final analysis if unable to do justice to them by Harper has that great scene where it gets loud and praise the Lord grant fantastic even him to making love but he's sincere. I mean when he talks to God if you notice the way I play that I don't preach.

Speaker 8 00:24:30.830
I mean I talk back directly to God in terms of what we all know and by rote we say our father who art in heaven and I say our father who art in heaven. I'm reaching out to talk to him as a personal Ally's leader. What have you.

Speaker 16 00:24:45.040
But he. But he believes this and I must believe it. Too. While I am in this part of the of the greatness and the excitement of black theater that in addition to the fact that the conditions of black people are conditions that need to be challenged and reflected through the theater through the media. It's also true that many black people particularly black actors and actresses have gone through a whole panoply of experiences life experiences so it becomes very easy to project.

Speaker 17 00:25:14.630
This to me is is is the potential greatness of the black artists and the black particularly black performer.

Speaker 6 00:25:21.440
We bring a lived experience is what I call the experience of pain. Let's see if we deepen ourselves as people and we can.

Speaker 17 00:25:35.270
We have the depth of experience to to bring that to whatever we do and therefore illuminate it to bring all of our passion all of our our our own experience to depict a wide range of human existence. My feeling is that in many instances black performers could play some quote international plays better than white performers those writers were writing like Sean Casey did about the Irish poor. I think that we probably have shared that experience to a certain extent much more than that the majority of let's say middle class white actors who have not particularly shared that that almost reflected in what black people have brought to the will yes to their eyes and ears.

Speaker 16 00:26:17.150
Now what are some of the new plateaus that you see black theater reaching toward. Well my my my feeling is that it's the question of black theater still remains its own ongoing permanence. Not.

Speaker 17 00:26:30.440
The permanence of of individual production all due respect to Wiz and all of the other plays that on Broadway not individual productions but the ongoing permanence of black theater institutions not just any C but but any institutions whose purpose is dedicated to to do to you know to remaining there as a permanent place where black artists can can can develop and can present their works. This is I guess this was the problem when we started and still remains to be aesthetically artistically I feel that what I see in terms of black theater is no matter how many first breezes or river Niger's is that the play is like waiting for Mongols which which is which which is also running at our downtown theater right now plays that are not necessarily the realistic play but I think what I what I see is the plateau is is even broadening this big art black audiences experience with a wider variety of plays.

Speaker 16 00:27:36.350
I think that's a good place on which to close the program because it does reflect where NBC is going and where black theater is going new Federal Theater a lot of other of the black theater companies. Guest on nights sort of reason has been Douglas Turner Ward who is a producer director actor and first breeze of summer which is now at the Palace Theatre at Broadway and Forty seven street the fresh breeze of summer at the Palace Theatre. Glad to have you with us tonight Doug.

Speaker 18 00:28:02.810
Thank you for. You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

