00:00:01.650
One of the main problems of the criminal justice system is finding jobs for X offenders. The Mid Manhattan branch of the Enderle ACP is project rebound is responsible for servicing 12 hundred sex offenders in a federally funded program here. Joseph Perkins director of Project rebound discussed this exciting program on tonight soul of reason. This is Soul of reason. A program that will examine the roots of the black box. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Our guest on this evening's program is Joseph Perkins who is the director of the Mid Manhattan branches project rebound and Joseph. Maybe you could begin our program tonight by telling us a little something both about the branch submit Manhattan branch of the ACP and about Project rebound which is sponsored by them while the amendment and branch of the NAACP is located at 270 West 96 street. And its basic function is to furnish those in the community with basic services such as assisting in legal rights assisting in housing discrimination assisting in job discrimination and all of the other avenues as it as has been the long history of the NAACP. I think it's good to point that up because many people think that since the NAACP is one of many legal victories that they've won going all the way back to the marriage case in 1939 and the Brown case in 1954 that they really honest responsive as some of the allegedly more militant organizations. And what you just reeled off there is just a litany of all kind of things that need to be done to improve conditions for black people. Well unfortunately in view of the fact that there have been many Oh we all funded programs that have been working in the same area many people tend to think that the organization is not functioning as it formally did in the past. However whenever there are laws on the books there still must be someone to watch to see that they are enforced and that is one of the functions sales organization of this type. And then of course the NAACP is an example of something that many of us say is a truism that is what is good for black people is good for the country as a whole. An example of that is the NWA people's action against capital punishment. It was literally the legal defense fund that led the battle for eliminating capital punishment. And even though the Supreme Court has ameliorated the regulation somewhat it's still difficult to just kill people and as we know 75 percent of the people on the death rolls of the nation are black but still this deals with the whole overall society. Now in the case of project rebound you concerned with ex offenders and as we mentioned at the top of program the one of the key problems of the criminal justice system is rehabilitation. What do you do with the ex offender after he or she has paid his alleged debt to society. Tell us exactly how Project rebound approaches this and give us a little something about the funding of the program. Well project rebound approaches this on several levels. One is that we go into institutions and interview persons that expect to be released on a parole date. We also find that there are many persons that are currently in the street that are in need of service. They have served their maximum sentence. However due to the fact that they have been involved with the criminal justice system it precludes them from being able to obtain gainful employment based solely on the fact they have an arrest history. So therefore project rebound itself acts as a buffer say between the client who is an ex offender and the society at large which is the club which is composed of all of us. We do this by number one contact from the employers and explaining what we are all about the services that we offer and that we will give the support of services to our clients if they will allow our clients the opportunity for gainful employment. Well what about some of the shibboleths that have been hurled at ex offenders namely that they're not reliable that there's a great deal of recidivism. They tend to recommit their crimes they're not good risk which is one of the reasons I think why many employers do not hire sex offenders and also as one of the reasons I guess why they are barred from taking certain types of government positions. What about those allegations. How do you deal with those. Well let's talk in terms of the piece in terms of recidivism. If a client who is an ex offender is not offered an alternative by alternative I mean that he's able to take off his basic necessities of life such as food rent and shelter. Then there is no other alternative to him to revert to but that which he has formerly been involved in which is a life of crime. What project rebound is all about is to offer that particular alternative I'm not sitting here saying that every sex offender is going to change over but what I am saying is for those that are given and offered an alternative it has been proven by the project itself that they can become gainfully employed. They can become gainfully employed rather and become producers and consumers rather than taking the tax dollar which is required to keep them incarcerated. Just decide an example last year in our funding period we placed over four hundred and fifty eight ex offenders on jobs and better than 70 percent of them are still employed. So that speaks for itself. What kind of jobs what kind of employees are most apt to hire sex offenders. Well what we have found is that originally we tried to deal with the large 500 companies 500 Fortune companies but what we found that the layers in terms of the layers of authority several layers having to give approval we found that this was not the best type of of of employee to get in contact with the owner operated companies where the is on the premises and isn't able to make a commitment and a decision. We found those companies and those businesses to be the ones that we are. We are able to deal with more readily for our clients and that a decision is made on the spot without having to have several persons to pass on a decision. Now course there are many kinds of crimes or crimes of passion as we know most homicides are crimes of passion there are crimes of assault crimes theft and then of course of white collar crimes and somehow or another in our society. And the more physical a crime is the heavier the penalty and the more money you take. Apparently if it's white collar crime the less penalty do you have problems placing one type of x offenders against another. Of course I didn't mention that there are a considerable number of crimes particularly in New York area drug related which means you have another kind of problem. Let me just ask the question what proportion of the people you service are people who have been involved in crime through drugs. And to what extent do you deal both with the drug problem and the job problem. Well basically better than 90 percent of the clients that are involved in our problem have have been involved say with narcotics. Are there crimes where narcotic oriented higher but they must be drug free at the time of entry into our program. We are finding that we're not trying to sell the fact of the type of crime that was committed to the employer. What we are basically dealing with the fact that a person has committed a crime he has served his particular sentence and as a result of being involved with our problem we feel that we can give him the supportive services that will be required number one to keep him on a job. And number two to keep him out of jail. So that is the type of program that we are all about because we feel that it's one thing to place a person on a job but it is supportive services that keeps him there. Well that certainly is true. When asked the question about whether there any one particular type of sex offender as against another it wasn't any suggestion that you should have gone in one direction or another. But I was just wondering whether employers are more apt to hire someone who's been involved in a white collar crime or in a petty theft or whatever is a matter of fact it might be that if you in a business you would probably not want someone who's in a white collar crime because you figured that they may use some of their tricks of the trade on the other hand that sort of talks against the principle of rehabilitation because basically although we know it really doesn't happen a great deal the major purpose of our criminal justice system is to rehabilitate the offender and say we know it doesn't happen very much but could you talk to that point for a moment. Is there any one particular type of offender X offender that seems to have more success getting a job. No not really in terms of our particular program what we have not had to come in our doors would be the persons they involve in that white collar crime that crimes say of embezzlement on a large scale. We get situation in terms of the petty larceny grand larceny is which are all on a much smaller scale. However you would the larger crimes of course are committed by persons that are thinkers and basically the educational level is much higher. Our clients have limited skills and limited education so therefore it makes it rather difficult for them to obtain employment. However if we were getting the the persons to come into us that may be some of the lawyers or the doctors that are involved in situations like that of course our placement potential would be much greater say our programs say the accountants of that nature but unfortunately we are not getting those type of persons. Of course in a sense this relates to the way in which crime affects black people just like everything else because of the low economic status of many blacks and the low educational status even when they become involved in crime becoming involved in crimes of violence. And then of course in the past 10 or 15 years so many of the crimes in the black community have been drug related. Speaking of crimes being drug related do you find now that there are fewer crimes being drug related or is it about at the same level. Well I find about at the same level at this particular point in time we are finding now that many persons that formerly have not been involved in the criminal justice system based upon the economy are finding that they have to find other means of support. It's not that they want to but as a matter of survival. And I feel that if we do not handle the problem in terms of dealing say with the sex offender in terms of offering him an alternative. The problem obviously is going to handle us because of the fact we are continually talking about safer streets. We are continually talking about that whole piece that's identified with it and economics has a definite bearing say on crime. And of course since then the ICP is primarily concerned with minority people usually black people and the economic crisis has hit the minority community most. That means that the need for your service is probably greatest right. Where are you giving the service namely in the middle of a community in Manhattan where they are significant numbers of black and Puerto Rican and other poor people. Are any or many of the people you service in Project rebound white. Well the breakout of that is basically Ninety five percent black and Hispanic and 5 percent say others are basically white which is indicative of the s the population of institution basically 95 percent black and Hispanic and 5 percent white. Those statistics seem to follow themselves right along. Now you talked about supportive services given the fact that many of the crimes are drug related. Given the fact that being in prison has a tremendous effect on family life. In any event given the fact that a considerable number of the people you have are under educated you have a wealth of services to provide and there's a wealth of need there. Which of these services do you highlight and how do you go about providing these services won't dealings say with the world of work. Many of our clients have lived in a hustling existence which is not time oriented. So we must deal with some of the basic facts in terms of work. Number one how to apply for a job on your own. Number two how to fill out a resume. Number three how to relate to supervision and more for how to get along with your peers. How to quit a job if it is required. Those are some of the things that we discuss with our clients prior to Evelyn and prior to even in gauging them in the world of work after getting on a job. We found that there are various pressures that come to bear when when you are now involved in the world of work get along with other people looking for advancement on the job dealing with various levels of supervision et cetera et cetera et cetera we ourselves work right along with the client in terms of placing them on a job finding out how he feels about the job if he sees it as a continuous situation or is it a short term measure. Number three now that you are employed where do we go from here. Now we are talking about education or now in talking about training upgrading so it's not just a matter of placing a person on a job. When we talk in terms of supportive service is meeting that goal and moving on to other aspects of life. Tonight on soul of reason we are talking with Joseph Perkins who is director of the Mid Manhattan double ACP Branch's project rebound a program for ex offenders. Now Joe as we are talking about how you work with these ex offenders one of the things audience may be interested in knowing is how does that extra funding get in touch with you and maybe if you give us the phone number where people can get more information about the project and then tell us just how does the sex offender get hooked up with Project rebound. Well we are located at 270 2 7 0 0 West 96 Street which is between Broadway and West End Avenue and our telephone number is 6 6 3 7 six hundred and terms of how we obtain our clients we obtain and we receive referrals from parole department from the probation department from various New York State that are not equipped to handle these special problems of the sex offender we receive referrals from the city and state and federal institution themselves. We have NAACP chapters established at several of the states to shine such as Green Haven Auburn Correctional Facility national not Correctional Facility Rahway State Prison in New Jersey Lewisburg Feld penitentiary in Lewisburg Pennsylvania and Atlanta Federal Penitentiary Atlanta Georgia all of those person that are incarcerated in these particular institutions returning to New York City make themselves available to our services. Now do you do any particular kind of screening because unfortunately there literally must be hundreds with thousands of people returning from institutions to our city. Do you do any pre screening do you do what they call a cream do you take the the least risk and put them in the program or do you do a random screening. How do you go about selecting people who are in your program. Well in terms of that is there is no such thing to me person person being such as cream of the crop because all the persons have been involved say in the process of incarceration. However what we do what project rebound in terms of selection of clients I would say is that it is mandatory for the class to move one to a 10 and say our job orientation sessions prior to being referred to employment. How many of those sessions are there. Those sessions are held every Wednesday and Thursday they are back to back and they are two hour sessions and if a person misses either one of the sessions he must start all over again. We found that many of our clients don't make it through that particular aspect of it. Now they are just two sessions are there for 10. It would depend upon the feedback that the counselor who is given the session gets from the client that that he gets from the client himself if he feels that the client is not ready to be referred for employment then He's rescheduled for a job orientation and need then this information of course is shared with a counselor who then works with the person on a one to one basis to correct these particular deficiencies that we have to find as deficient as I see and then after they've gone through this pre screening then what happened after the person has gone through the pre screening then upon the job develop or staying in his job orientation sessions that he feels that decline is ready to be referred for a job he is then put in contact with a job developer who has been developing jobs all along while all along this particular process we inform the client of what is available what we have at that particular time and then he can make his decision on whether he wants to be number one if an interview should be set up for this particular job we found that it is easier for a client to say to us in the office well I do not want to get involved with that type of job versus going to the employee and refusing the job because when we discuss a job the job the job is there it is not the fact that the person is going somewhere and maybe a job is available. We know the job the title the skill that's required the salary and the whole bit. And what are some of the types of jobs that are available and what we found now is that basically in New York City the jobs are going into zero clerical oriented. The blue collar jobs are basically leaving the city itself. We are coming back and we are becoming rather is a city of somewhat specialization. So I would think in those types of jobs are available readily at this particular point of time that leads into us we would say a female oriented type of job because we have we have not saying that we do not have males because I don't want to get involved with the women's little piece of it that we do not have males that type is stenographers the employees do not say we prefer our females however it is implied well what percent of the people in your project are male and female the percentage is 5 percent female and 95 percent male which is almost a another statistic that is indicative of the criminal justice system itself. So that the pattern sounds seems to follow itself right along line. Not if you indicate that the most frequently available job is a clerical type job and same time many of your clients have low educational skills. How do you resolve those. Because it's true that clerical can range anywhere from just filing papers but even in filing papers you have to know the alphabet and you have to know something about reading and then it moves up to typing and to some minor computational work to the full range of secretarial work and given the fact that most people in those fields in the past have been women and also many of the ex offenders don't have high level educational skills. How do you get around that how do you deal with that and I know sort of pushing your but for our audiences sake I think it's important to sort of see how we go about this very very difficult problem of placing ex offenders. One of one of the ways that we have found to work in trying to open up other avenues just rather than to say the clerical piece is we have a component which is known which is call an on job training component which is funded by the Department of Employment where we are. We are in a position where we can offer prospective employer a reimbursement of a salary for the hiring of our clients up to a a maximum of seventy five dollars per week and up to a contracted period not to exceed 26 weeks. But what this will do it will mean that the employee will hire our client and we'll train him specifically to do a particular job at his particular company. It's beneficial for the client and it's also beneficial for the company because we absorb a certain percentage of salary. Now in looking at this program which seems to be extremely broad you have orientation people you have job developers you have counselors and I imagine you have evaluation specialists and you service some twelve hundred people. How much does a project like this cost and then how can you compare that cost with what it would take let's say to support these same population in prison. Well in terms of our total budget that we receive from the Department of Employment we receive six hundred five thousand dollars from the Department of Employment to service the 360 clients that we must place if we want to put this on a dollar and send basis it requires approximately sixteen thousand dollars to keep one person incarcerated in a penal institution if it's a family of four. The Department of Social and the department the wife must apply for public assistance. Department of Welfare we give approximate forty two hundred dollars. So for one family we are now talking about twenty thousand dollars sixteen thousand dollars. Keep him incarcerated. Forty two hundred dollars to keep his family as a subsistence allowance. The person becomes involved in our particular project and we obtain a job for him. No one that's an immediate sixteen thousand dollars saved because you are no longer paying to keep him in the course of rate it if the salary is of such nature. What we now can remove his family from the public assistance rolls as a another four thousand two hundred dollars savings of tax levied moneys. The person is now a consumer and a taxpayer because he is now gainfully employed. So if we multiply that say if 200 of our clients say we're married and we multiply say 200 times the twenty thousand dollar figure that I have recently spoken on we can see that the amount of money that we get from the Federal Government is returned to the city of New York a fourfold or better in terms of breaking it out. And I think that's very important because a lot of people in our society do not understand the problems that it's associated with having a criminal justice system it doesn't work. And I would have to say that at least in my opinion the criminal justice system in the United States of America doesn't work. We have a high degree of recidivism. People who are returning to their crime and to prison and even in the prisons with the exception of projects like yours. It doesn't seem to be that much happening that is making these people whole people. Now it's probably true that the base of crime particularly type when we talk marriage is poverty is the fact that significant segments of the population do not have access to the wealth of our society. And what project rebound is trying to do as some other project that this type of trying to do is to put these people into a situation where at least they can sustain themselves. Now when you evaluate you've given a little financial evaluation which I think was really excellent and when you evaluate the program what do you think the strong points of your program are in terms of where you operate and what do you think the weak points of your program are. Because every program has strengths and weaknesses. Well I think in terms of let's deal with the weaknesses first. I think number one is the fact that we feel that we are only set up right now to deal with a part of the problem. And I feel in order for a program like this to to have continued success we must be able to deal with the whole man. By that I mean to be able to handle a problem in terms of his if it's psychological if his problem is a housing problem or if his problem is education job placement employment whatever a program in order to deal with the entire man must be equipped totally to deal with this aspect of it rather than to become a referral piece. That is the weak this of our program as I see it and we hope to correct that in the very near future if we can obtain funding for it. The strength of our program. Of course I feel no one assistant is number one is the sincerity. The fact that we are committed for what we are what we are all about. Our staff is committed for what we are all about. Number two the feeling that we give the client when he comes in into our into our project is very important. The sensitivity that's involved in that particular aspect of it combined with the services that we offer we we do not state anything. We do not overstate what we can do we attempt to state number one our assets and our limitations. They are for everything that we say right upfront. So those are the positive pieces of it. Now who funds your programs is funded out of Legal Assistance Administration. Well I think it's called Law Enforcement Assistance Administration or is it funded out of the Manpower Agency the Department of Labor or out of one or the other many programs that we have an alphabet soup of United States. Well we are funded about a manpower Career Development Administration Department of Employment which is located at 220 Church Street. Commissioner Lucio Rose. These are manpower funds that are dispersed in New York City from the federal government. I see now in terms of these new services that you want to provide some family counseling services some educational services etc.. Is it possible within the existing legislation to be able to fund these services or do you now have to reach out to other types of agencies to get these funds for these services. What will have to happen is that we will have to receive funding from several agencies in order to to implement the type of program that I'm talking about because unfortunately no one agency is equipped to handle that many services departments employment focus of course is employment mental hygiene which we are talking in terms of the other fact that we may have to go to say an agency of that type to obtain funds. So it will require us to obtain funds from several agencies. I see is there any other social service agency that has funds for programs like this the addiction service agency the manpower Korean Development Administration the New York City criminal justice coordinating council. Those are some of the agencies that are located in New York City that offer funding to programs like ours. I think you're giving our audience an excellent overview of project rebound. Our guest on the night soul of reason has been Joseph Perkins who's director of the Mid Manhattan NAACP branches project rebound a program for sex offenders a program which has been very successful in helping to provide jobs for people who have been involved with the criminal justice system. Those who are interested in getting further information about this program should call Project rebound at 6 6 3 7 600. That's 6 6 3 7 600. Thanks again Joseph Perkins. And thank you for inviting me Dr. Brown. You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

