Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.680
The National Medical Fellowship supported 1,840 minority medical students in 1974-75. The National Medical Fellowship supports 65 percent of all first year minority medical students. Hear Jerry Lewis and Marion Bondurant of the National Medical Fellowships discuss the program and objectives of this important organization on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:45.380
This is "Sole of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. Soul of reason is produced by the NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:12.350
With us this evening is Jerry Lewis who is president of the National Medical Fellowships Inc., and Marion Bondurant who is Assistant Director of Development for this organization. Glad to have you both with us this evening.

Jerry Lewis 00:01:25.191
It's nice being here.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:26.781
Well firstly Jerry why don't you give our audience some background about this organization. The organization has been around some time but most recently has increased its activities dramatically. So could you give us some background of the organization, Jerry?

Jerry Lewis 00:01:40.160
Yes. National Medical Fellowships, which was founded in 1946, is the only nationwide organization that is concerned with increasing the number of minority physicians who are currently underrepresented in the medical school. For example, Blacks, mainland Puerto Ricans, American Indians, and Mexican Americans over the past since twenty nine years we've given support to the tune of 11 million dollars. Over the past five years it's been-- our most large increase has been in the area of 9 million dollars to aid minority students in medical school.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:13.830
Well I understand that as the organization was first founded it was concerned primarily with improving the skills of black physicians in various specialties. And more recently have moved into supporting undergraduate medical students.

Jerry Lewis 00:02:28.610
Yes we were very much concerned in our beginning because many minority black physicians at the time could not get decent internships and residencies therefore they could not specialize which meant that in the long term they could not have visiting professorships at hospitals and so therefore minority patients could not be seen in these hospitals on the private patient basis. But since then we've moved into to really feeling the problem is to get many more minority students into medical school. And if we got them into medical schools other than Howard and Meharry- or in addition to Howard and Meharry- these medical schools would have a moral obligation to help them in their internships and residencies and choice spots.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:08.090
I notice you moved from black to minority. Now, is it true that the organization was first formed to deal with black physicians and more recently has moved into dealing with meeting the minority physician need?

Jerry Lewis 00:03:21.710
Yes in 1946 when the organization was started by Dr. McLean, a white physician in Chicago, the problem at that time was getting more black physicians into decent training programs. And since 1970, when a task force met to look at this problem, they decided that the real problem was massive support- financial support- by a organization like ours which had a nationwide movement to move into the area and supporting all of these minorities who were currently underrepresented in medical school.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:54.020
I see. Marion, about how many students are you supporting? I mentioned 1,840 in 1974-75 I believe the year before was

Marian Bondurant 00:04:04.251
1760 the

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:04.253
year before. Now, and I would assume then- and maybe my assumption is wrong- that in '75-'76, you'd be supporting more. Considering the growth curve going up, or is the, has the economy hit you to the point where, like all organizations, you've had to contract a little?

Marian Bondurant 00:04:21.920.0000000000291
Well unfortunately the economy has hit us and we have not really decided on the number of awards for '75-'76. They will be fewer than '74-'75.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:34.811
And that's largely because of the effects of the economy.

Marian Bondurant 00:04:37.161
Yes it is. We've had to cut back as- the same as many of the organizations in the city and in the country. We were- well we've raised almost as much as last year but not enough to increase the number of assistance given to students.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:50.530
And one thing I noticed Jerry is that your emphasis seems to be on students in the first two years and not as much on students in the last two years and in your materials you say the reason for that is that by the time they get there they have learned how to survive. Having been around Washington D.C. and met loads of medical students who drive cabs and few other things, I just wonder about the logic of that or are you really just saying that you're giving it where you think there is the greatest need.

Jerry Lewis 00:05:17.960
Well we feel that the first two years of medical school are the hardest for any student including minority students. These minority students who get to medical school-- in the past few years- have been coming largely from families with incomes less of less than seven or eight thousand dollars so these students have no uncles or aunts to help them. So therefore we have to give them the maximum amount of support during those first two years. If they get through those first two years which most of them do, then it is much easier for them to borrow. They become a greater- ah, an easier risk for the banks and they have to borrow the same as anybody else.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:49.940
That's very interesting. A number of people are unaware that the biggest job in terms of getting medical training is getting into medical school because the overwhelming number of people who attend medical schools black and white and other minorities do manage to graduate.

Jerry Lewis 00:06:05.392
Yes. So a big problem is to get the academic preparation to get in and then to get the financial preparation and, Marion in your experience, which of these two obstacles do you think has been the greatest for minority students. Has it been to get the academic preparation and get the medical schools to accept them or has it been financial?

Marian Bondurant 00:06:26.510
Well the biggest obstacle has been financial really because of course there are many more applicants than there are places in the medical schools and although [crosstalk]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:36.111
Many more minority applicants?

Marian Bondurant 00:06:37.550
Yes many more minority applicants and many more [crosstalk]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:39.420
Are they equally qualified as white applicants?

Marian Bondurant 00:06:41.540
Yes they are. Yes they are.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:43.971
Because one of the allegations has been that the reason why they have not been an adequate number of minorities in medical schools before is that because of the low quality of education particularly in the high schools and in some of the colleges they haven't been able to score adequately on a medical apps and so on. And Jerry you're saying that no longer is a problem or it's less of a problem.

Jerry Lewis 00:07:06.590
I'm saying that of course there are fewer minorities who are prepared for medical school than than the general population. But even in that case despite the obstacles that blacks and other minorities have had to face. I mean there are a number there are many applicants out there. The problem is that there are many medical schools only recently began accepting blacks in any significant numbers.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:24.830
Now why do you think that's the case. Because it's true as you said earlier that Howard University in Washington D.C. and Meharry Medical College in Nashville Tennessee have turned out over 90 percent of black physicians in the past. And as you say they can - only can take- what is it- 120 or thereabouts each year. That means only about 240 out of the some eighteen hundred and forty that you're dealing with. So why is it that all of a sudden some medical schools in the north and also in the south which have been predominately white or all white are now taking Black and other minority medical students? Why- why is that come about? I think it is a combination of several factors. Number one I think that there is- there was a movement during the '60s and early '70s by the federal government in terms of equal employment affirmative action programs at the medical schools number one. Number two there was a movement within the minority community which dealt with the whole question of education and where role models began to be developed in terms of the whole becoming aware of what's available by minorities. I think the other thing is that organizations like the NMF or the NMF made it attractive for medical schools for example if a medical school accepted a minority student the chances are almost always that that medical school is going to have to look- reach until their scholarship fund to help that minority student. But if they knew that National Medical Fellowship was on the sideline to say OK we will help finance that student's medical education it meant that it reduced the amount of money they had to spend so therefore we we became a multiplier effect. That's another reason. The other reason is that there are- a number of the medical schools have gotten very enlightened deans and- and staff there who have been actively recruiting and this includes throughout the country the south and north ...who are aware of the fact that it is necessary for there to be more black and other minority positions. And how do you answer this question because the question is frequently asked: Why do we really need more minority physicians? Don't we just need more physicians? And if they happen to be minorities that's fine but now we are saying- and those of us in the Black community including myself are saying- yes we need more Black physicians. We need more Puerto Rican physicians. Now why is that? What's the logic behind that?

Jerry Lewis 00:09:41.150
Well you know- Marion you can talk to this- but I think personally and and also the feeling of the NMF board of directors and staff is that number one it is in the minority communities that we suffered disproportionately that a number of illnesses and social pathologies and I think which have to be addressed and most often minority physicians practice in minority communities is number one. Number two is that is that it is that the minority physician creates a role model and that role models that other youngsters feel that they can they can become physicians. I think I when I was growing up we didn't see that many Black physicians and that was something that was on the moon or something. I think that the more physicians who are available then the more youngsters will aspire to become physicians. And the other thing is that why shouldn't the Black or the Puerto Rican or the Mexican-American youngster have just as great a chance of becoming a physician as anyone else.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:31.430
Well of course that is consistent with the so-called American idea of equal opportunity which we know really hasn't been equal particularly for Blacks and for other minorities as well. And when you deal with that particular question about minority physicians practicing in minority communities it does get back to the fact that medical practice is changing: that basically most physicians have some type of affiliation with a large medical center or some type of large practice. So in a sense the validity of the argument of saying well look they're going to practice in minority communities probably falls apart. On the other hand there might be another reason Marian why you might say we do need more minority physicians particularly in the context of the type of illnesses that minority people have.

Marian Bondurant 00:11:23.640
Well I think that of course Black physicians certainly can relate better to Black people. And although many physicians now are being- are involved in group practices, there are many group practices that are set up in the- within minority communities.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:37.801
Well what about the idea that- I think now we have about 7000 or thereabouts 75 hundred- 8000 black physicians.

Jerry Lewis 00:11:47.311
Not that many but

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:48.060
Not that many.

Marian Bondurant 00:11:48.900
Almost. [crosstalk]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:48.902
Almost that many. OK. So it represents what about 2 percent or

Jerry Lewis 00:11:53.811
A little more than 2 percent

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:54.741
2 and a half percent.

Jerry Lewis 00:11:55.960
This is a distortion [crosstalk] because many of them are very, very very old.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:59.110
But that- and that really really means that at one time they were a pretty good output but then as the total number of physicians in the country increase the minority sort of lag behind so that's where National Medical Fellowship steps in. All right let's talk about National Medical Fellowships and money and that leads us to Marian's area which is fundraising. How do you get your money. [laughter] That's a very crass way of approaching the question. But

Marian Bondurant 00:12:24.981
Well

00:12:25.471
I'm sure that there are many in the audience who not only want to apply for the fellowships but some who might even want to donate to the program.

Marian Bondurant 00:12:32.010
Well most of our money comes from foundations, corporations, and there are some individual gifts. Now over the past five years, I'd say that the number of grants have increased from about 200,000 to over 2 million dollars. And that's because of support from primarily from foundations that we get about 70 percent of our support from foundations, about 30 percent from corporations. And now what we're really trying to do is to increase the number of individual contributors. And that's where we hope to get Black professionals involved- Black physicians, you know, interested in the program and also willing to contribute and support us.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:12.630
And I'm sure you wouldn't be adverse to taking money from white individuals as well.

Marian Bondurant 00:13:16.420
No no of course not.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:18.421
When we talk about raising money [crosstalk]

Marian Bondurant 00:13:19.951
Well, first of all most of the individual contributions that we get now are from white individuals. And we are trying to reach- you know- out to the Black community and get more support from Black professionals and other individuals [crosstalk]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:31.831
Now if anyone wants to get in touch with your organization either for information about the fellowships or for information as to how they can contribute they should contact you at what address and

Marian Bondurant 00:13:43.562
how? Ah, they should contact us at 250 West 57 Street, New York, New York 119.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:50.641
And the name of the organization is the National Medical Fellowships Incorporated.

Marian Bondurant 00:13:54.510
Right. And that's for applications for scholarships or else if they're interested in giving a contribution.

00:14:00.660
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" are Jerry Lewis who's President and Marian Bondurant who is Assistant Director of Development of the National Medical Fellowships Incorporated. And Jerry speaking of the National Medical Fellowships Incorporated, when you put an Incorporated on that suggests that you're a corporation and I assume you're a nonprofit corporation. Could you tell you tell us something about the corporation: how it's structured, who some of the board members are, and how you function.

Jerry Lewis 00:14:25.590
Right. The National Medical Fellowships is the only nationwide nonprofit organization that provides financial assistance to min- minorities in medical school. Most of our funds, since we have no funds of our own, come from individual contributors, from foundations and corporations. Our board is primarily made up of people with a background of medical education. It's a very distinguished board. We have some business people on the board. The current chairman of the board is is Bernard Nelson, Dr. Brendan Nelson, who is a professor at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine in Madison, Wisconsin. It has people on the board like Dr. Hubbard who is president of Upjohn and Company. And so Mr. Morton Miller who is vice chairman for the Equitable Life Insurance Company - we have many medical educators

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:17.822
And then the decisions about who gets these fellowships is determined by an awards committee and Marian maybe you could tell us something about how that awards committee works.

Marian Bondurant 00:15:27.690
Well the awards committee is made up of a few board members, about- approximately- five board members and they decide the number of the awards, the value of the awards, and whether awards should go to first and second year students or upperclassmen and they also decide on the qualifications for the awards.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:46.840
Well given the fact that you've been in operation after some 20 years you must have alumni and some pretty distinguished alumni. Marion maybe could tell us about some of your distinguished alumni and also the fact that we ought to be reaching in their pockets and getting some money to help support the fellowship. Well we have approximately a thousand alumni nationally and some of the more prominent ones in New York are Dr. Drew Christmas who's head of the city Department of Mental Health. Dr. Hubert who is vice chairman vice commissioner of the State Department of Mental Health. My column in Dr. John S. Ellis Island was head of the health and hospital corporation. That's just to name a few. Listen Xander there are many of them who we know if some of those because Dr. Christmas and Dr. Holman have been guest on so well reason talking about some of the things that they are doing. And that's just an example of what can happen when there is money to support minorities who couldn't otherwise afford to go to medical school. And speaking of that you said that 65 percent of all first year minority students get some support from the IMF and the national medical fellowships that suggested maybe I'm wrong about that. That suggests that 65 percent of those students are going into that first year medical school are really poor. Or does it suggest that given the high cost of medical education some 6000 hours a year there might even be some middle class students who need some support. Well what about that Marian.

Marian Bondurant 00:17:18.050
Well we help many poor students and we also help many middle class students because you have to realize I think the average tuition is white between five and six thousand dollars and a student who is financially needy can get some assistance from the medical school and you'll get oh well approximately one third from the medical school one third from national medical fellowships and one third the student has to take the form of Islam which really is a tremendous burden which leads into something at some of the people and health have been talking about and there is some type of federal program to train physicians.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:54.330
The United States is one of the few countries in the world where physicians are trained totally or primarily by private funds. Jerry what are the prospects for passage of some of the bills which I know I've been introduced in the Congress involving the training of physicians not just minority positions but physicians in general.

Jerry Lewis 00:18:15.410
Well we have the health professional scholarship program which ran for several years and that was extremely helpful to minority group physicians that ran out. In fact the students last group of students are receiving the benefits of that which so that's a program where if they practice in inner city areas they wouldn't have to pay back the loan or with direct grants for needy minority and disadvantaged students and direct grants. Health and professions are fellowships is what it was. What were they worth about how much they had.

Marian Bondurant 00:18:44.360
Well the federal government gave away about seven million dollars a year and a total I guess a few thousand dollars a year depending on the student's needs. And that began in 1967 as Jerry just said it ran out. This pass.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:57.680
What's being instituted to replace it because it needs delay.

Speaker 14 00:19:01.280
What worries some of us here in the in the field is that what's available to minority students on a competitive basis with all medical students is the military the armed forces problem which means that a student has to decide that he or she will not become a member of the armed forces and practice medicine they or industry or whatever they prefer right now which again limits some of the minority community of having these people practice there. That's number one. The other thing is that they can. There are some public health service grants which means that you will you will pay back this time to the U.S. Public Health Service which means you would serve in some of the areas they designate. Many of those areas designate are certainly not in an inner city minority communities in this country they usually are in places in Montana South Dakota would have. Well what really happened with this. I think you heard the Health Professions Act. It seems like it was a good idea and certainly it may have had a timeline but the need is probably as great or greater today than when the Act was first passed. What is it a part of the retrenchment of Nixon Ford administration or is it something that the medical profession itself is saying it doesn't want. Well I think it's a part of the. In the past few years the philosophy in this country which which has kind of given up on its commitment it made to minorities here we are talking about a program which is which is which is a non welfare concept you're helping people not only can the physician of graduation from a medical school work and are helping the minority community he or she is able to practice medicine in any part of this country or world. And we see a a falling back on a commitment to to help and I think that there is some question now what's going to be happening with then the federal government in this area. I hope it's not like some of us think that there is a pulling back from a commitment made several years ago.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:50.660
Well I would think that the U.S. citizens particularly black and other minority citizens who are concerned about this should be putting pressure on their congressmen for example as your organization put any direct pressure on the Congressional Black Caucus about this so that they can then begin to act on behalf of reviving this type of scholarship program.

Speaker 14 00:21:09.880
I think we've included Black as well as white congressmen in our educational programs in terms of providing the factual information that they should have particularly where those black Congress people have constituency they ought to know what's going on in their area and hopefully this combined will look at the national program and we certainly would feel that Congressman Chisholm and in Brooklyn should know about the kinds of problems her constituents have in getting into medical school and the financial.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:36.610
And of course in the final analysis it'll come as a result of pressure from those minority communities. And speaking of pressure from minority communities Marion and another minority community at least in terms of representation and medical professions women. Is there any particular emphasis in the national medical fellowship about recruiting or maybe you don't recruit because students already have to be accepted but funding women minority women and in particular emphasis there. Why what proportion of your recipients are women.

Marian Bondurant 00:22:08.260
Well for the past academic year we gave 32 percent of our awards to women. And that's rather high because women's did not represent thirty two percent of all the medical students.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:18.970
I believe in the most recent statistics I've seen that somewhere 18 percent of medical freshmen this past year were women. And there is an attempt to increase the number of women in the medical profession. And what you're suggesting is that the number of minority women is even higher. Now is this because of people like Marilyn Von Duran on the staff of national medical fellowships or is this because of an awareness and a commitment on the part of the board that there should be more minority women physicians. No it's a combination of the two. I see you smile like you're very persuasive in getting that point across. But let's go back again and do what the average citizen person in the street can do to help support this worthy organization is worthy cause. Because you say most of your money comes from foundation of corporations which is good. But here we have the black community that Mexican-American community Puerto Rican community we're going to be beneficiaries ultimately of this. And up to date mainly because the way in which the organization was structured most of your money has come from outside of these communities. What specifically are you doing Marian in there are new development within these minority communities.

Marian Bondurant 00:23:31.930
Well what. Well we just had a benefit about two weeks ago which was fairly well was quite successful I wouldn't say fairly successful at the Westchester premium Theater which we did involve a number of black physicians black individuals who were in business and working within the allied health field and they supported us and we had over a thousand people attending a benefit. And we did make some money on that and that was a way really to publicize the program. In addition to raising money.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:03.070
One of the purposes of sole reason is to discuss and analyze some of the issues that face the Black and minority communities in New York City in the metropolitan area. And this is obviously one we do not have enough minority physicians. We don't have enough black physician and even those many youth who want to go to medical school even if they can meet the academic standards have great difficulty in actually getting the financial resource. Now in terms of applying for the fellowship. JERRY Is it true that the applicants have to already have been accepted in medical school or do they make an application at the same time as they apply and they can do it in both ways.

Jerry Lewis 00:24:44.950
I mean just for a minute back up a second we do receive a very small grant from AGW and this Grant Grant the purpose of this grant is to help provide information to youngsters from minority communities interested in medical school. So therefore in these go may go to high school youngsters or college youngsters so in some way we are actually involved in recruitment or a youngster may when he or she is ready to apply to medical school. Therefore all financial aid officers know of us and this ought to help us student but an additional student may write us directly and we have we have ways of getting information all over all counselors at high schools and at colleges should have the material. But in addition we do programs like this bring it to the community.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:27.950
Well what do you think the most important most effective recruitment technique is in getting Black youth interested in medicine as a profession. And I would really add dentistry to this you folks don't represent history but I think even word is need for minority dentist is even worse than the need for minority is even greater rather than the need for minority physicians. But what is it what's your most effective recruitment technique. How do you get. I know this isn't your business but it's also related to you. How do you get minority youth black youth who are struggling along having trouble with chemistry and having trouble with Calculus to say look I want to pass all of this stuff and get myself into a medical school. How do you reach them. What do you do.

Speaker 16 00:26:12.040
We think one of the most effective recruitment methods is to have many of these young Black people out there who are already in medical school and have finished we have many graduates what 23 24 25 years old who are from these communities who go back and say hey look you can go out or you can play basketball for eight hours a day and get good. You're the best and all it takes. If you really want to become a physician you don't have to be an A student doctor to be a B plus student you can be a B student or be mine. I mean to say I want to be students working on me what counts is your motivation and your willingness to really hang in there and study and learn and I think that's the one thing we try to get across.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:46.840
That's a very good point. I was being somewhat facetious when I say a B student work you or me but that's part of the mentality of our society and in the sense is one of the problems of medical schools a face that basically they are oriented to developing research specialist rather than practitioners. And what you're suggesting is that by this type of communication between minority students who are already in medical school and those students in the high schools and colleges helping to break that down. But that doesn't mean that we aren't interested in excellence. I think that you would agree that they are just as many black physicians who are A students and excellent as they are white physicians. But you're pointing up then the practice of medicine as a broader thing it's really a people area as well as a science.

Speaker 14 00:27:29.140
And also the fact that once many of these youngsters really can get a feeling that they they can accomplish something of value they really take off. We've had students who have come to the medical school and really have taken off.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:39.580
Well that's certainly true and that shows the significance of the work of national medical fellowships. If anyone in the audience is interested in contacting them they can contact national medical fellowships at 250 West 57 Street. Our guest on tonight "Soul of Reason" have been Jerry Lewis, President, and Marian Bondurant Assistant Director for Development of a National Medical Fellowships.

