Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:00:01.470
"Part Two, Sounder" is the sequel to "Sounder ," the award winning film about a Black family in Louisiana. Here, Leonard erring, public relations specialists discuss the problems of promoting Black films on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:35.690
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason' is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:01:02.360
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Leonard Herring, who is in charge of public relations for the film "Part two, Sounder" which is the sequel to the award winning "Sounder". And we're glad to have you with us tonight Leonard.

Leonard Herring 00:01:14.070
Glad to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:01:15.771
One of the things that we're gonna talk about tonight is the problem of promoting what we might call serious meaningful Black films. Films like "Leadbelly", films like "The River Niger" and films like 'Part 2, Sounder". And we've seen right in New York that we've had difficulty mobilizing a significant enough audience to keep the film moving. We hope to get it back sometime soon. But this is the type of problem that we face. Now to just begin top of the show could you indicate why, Bob Radnit, who was the producer, decided to do "Part 2, Sounder" and what the real difference is between this film and the original "Sounder"?

Leonard Herring 00:01:58.880
I think Bob's whole idea was to to expound upon the whole idea of the family that particular area. And I think that his whole thought was not to continue in the same vein but to utilize a different idea. And as you remember in the film it did show that we were talking more of about the problems of building the school as opposed to Sounder itself.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:02:27.960
Yeah that's one of the criticisms that the critics made. it said Sounder was like somebody who passed through and that became the name. And I know Bob Radnitz as well and I know that he said yes the reason why he used that name is that this is something the public could identify with. And frequently we find sequels of all type. We have "Godfather 2" and "This is Entertainment 2" and all that kind of thing which has to do with the need I guess of the film industry to keep producing things that the public will identify with. But in changing story, the story really focuses on the father,, the family. Nathan Lee working with his neighbors to build a school in this backwoods part of Louisiana against tremendous financial odds and against the opposition of the white landholders and the like. Which to those of us who've been through the struggle for Black education is a very significant type of experience. Not to do you want to relive it, but it wasn't significant. Apparently this has not really caught on with the audiences. And of course this bigger at least in New York I understand the film is doing fairly well in other places. But this is the type of problem that you have in promoting what we might call serious Black films as against the blaxploitation films which deal with violence and gore and you know racy language and sex and things like that. So how do you you seize this part to sound in the context of that problem?

Leonard Herring 00:04:00.980
Well basically it's like anything else. When you have a multitude of things going on especially the movies that you're mentioning it's kind of hard to come out and to say listen we have a very serious film. I think that one of the the ideas that we have used and with "Part 2, Sounder" was to to do as we've done in New York. To to get reputable VIP Black Americans around the country to host these things. And that in itself has as had been pretty good.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:04:33.610
Did you mean to host a private screening [cross talk] and put out so that they will begin to identify with the film say its good and spread the word by word of mouth to other people?

Leonard Herring 00:04:42.470
Exactly. They've always been screening and you know just having the press there and a few people. But I think this has worked very well throughout the country and hopefully the film will catch on as opposed to using the running of promotions and ads and that type thing.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:05:02.060
Yeah although I notice that you have a fairly significant ad campaign or you did have one in New York area. What effect does the critics response to a film have on audiences? The original "Sounder" got fair reviews on the first go round and on the second go round after it began to be a box office success. Some of the same critics weren't so hot went back and reviewed it again and they came up with reasons why it was good. Which is sort of a self-fulfilling prophecy. But the second film a sequel "Part 2, Sounder" got reviews that said it's a nice film but it's overly sentimental. It isn't dramatic and it's nice that these little Black people at their school. Which is sort of a Naga is it puts a negative on it in terms of someone who really isn't no tooled up to see it because they want to see successful Back people. And maybe that's one of the problems that we have about dealing with the serious Black films, films that show Black people striking out against the system, Black people standing up for what they believe and fighting for some of the things that we as Back people need.

Leonard Herring 00:06:11.350
You know that's funny you'd mentioned that because and in the Bay Area, for example ,a lot of the critics there even though they somewhat endorse the film felt that they want to see violence. And it completely shocked me because it was complete against what Bob was talking about. For example, if remember in the film were when Nathan is saying to the landowner that "I am having problems" and the landowner make makes a remark to him "I heard you're spending a lot of time on this of the school " and you could see the smile that was supposed to say well the guy's gonna give me some money. But then when he says "Oh I hope you know what you're doing". Well the reaction there. You know that we as Black folks we know when we see these things. But I think too many white critics they wanted to see it you know. And as I the first thing with my mind was Richard Pryor's statement at one of his albums about we know we've seen you make love in the movie you know that that thing. And we've had to read these things into it. Now here we go into a Black situation whereby the white critics or white people are saying they wanted to see it as opposed to reading into it. So I understand you

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:07:33.800
it's part of the subtlety of the black experience as a whole. Of course some critics will say that oppression and resistance to oppression is universal and they are universal statements that films can and should make. In a sense I feel that some films that deal with social messages are seen to be great after the fact. That after people come to see them and after they begin to say this is a great film it's a good film whatever reason. Then you can go back and look at the films that yeah that was there and that is a problem that I see. Of course the other thing is that many of the young people many young Black people particularly have been hooked on this violence, racing cars, racing women and racy language. And without the role models the people that you're trying to involve and helping to carry the message It doesn't work. And one question might be is when we invite Back VIPs to a screening even though we're inviting people who have status and name in the Black community maybe those aren't the people that Black people, the everyday Black person on the street listens to. Which is a very interesting thing that even politicians have been talking about who does and this is not only for the Black population but white population as well. Who does the man in the street really listen to?

Leonard Herring 00:08:59.930
Well basically right when I when I mentioned VIPs I was only talking about the host. Hopefully in most cases for example, you take Richard Hatcher in Chicago and one liner in the Bay Area. But they did invite VIP taxi cab drivers, VIP whoever. We were not trying to stay with the doctors and lawyer. Because you and I know that these people are the people who get invited things free. These the people who stay in their little circles. So that is a problem and hopefully we won't get interrupted there.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:09:34.210
You know when you're in public relations you cover a lot of other promotions and campaigns and the like. And public relations is a relatively new field for Blacks. There have been a few people who've been doing it for long years. I can remember remember I name a Billboard. Jackson who used to work for, that's the name, "Billboard", when they used to have the big billboards, who used to work for Standard Oil when it was Esso. And he was one of the first Blacks to get into this. But now that the business community is recognize the massiveness of the of the Black population in terms of the total dollar value they are putting more attention to it. And as a result this suggests the need for more people who are specialized in working in the Back community. And as you do your work in public relations working on these various projects what do you find to be the most successful technique and getting any particular public relations message out to the Black population?

Leonard Herring 00:10:36.630
I find it odd that you don't change your your program, programming your ads for example to go from say a "New York Times" that were there would be daily as opposed to an "Amsterdam News" that would be maybe a weekly. My thing is that is that I try to use this this idea of keeping it before the public using the same type ads, using the same type programming, the same type language talking but yet utilizing black newspapers Black radio right on down the line. [crosstalk]

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:11:12.930
That raises a question. Sometimes some of the ads that the major media producing now do have Blacks in the ads. But some of them still are lily white. And I've turned to the Amsterdam News and more than one occasion and I've seen an ad that has only white characters in it in a very swanky upper upper middle class situation advertising some kind of car or liquor or what have you. And I really wonder, other than the fact it is a little lazy or cheap in terms of producing another ad as to why they would approach it in that way. And in a sense you haven't said exactly the same thing would you say well let's use your mainstream ad. Now I can see a mainstream ad if it involves minority people in the ad. But if the ad is totally mainstream how is that really going to be effective?

Leonard Herring 00:12:01.932
On mainstream I am truly for integrated ads. Everything I do is integrated in terms of my my ads. My reasoning for that is that I know as a as a Black that when I pick up a newspaper I'll pick up anything and I see a Black face that automatically tells me...

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:12:20.571
Says I'm involved. That's what it says [crosstalk] SS As

Leonard Herring 00:12:22.211
And when I said total I'm talking about integrated ads that would go to both market and both ads..

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:12:28.750
Okay, in other words you really are following the point that was developing and [crosstalk] weren't talking about the old ads of use. Well what about some other public relations techniques that can be used to reach the Black community on any particular issue?

Leonard Herring 00:12:43.110
Well you, I find you've got to go out there. I mean you have to a, to a.., The word of mouth thing is probably more important than anything else. And I think once you identify and once you recognize. And that's my key. That's the key word. I feel a recognition of race that. Everybody must be recognized whoever they are. And when you go out and really get involved or go to the area and include these type of promotions always to be successful.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:13:15.180
Now in making the decision about the film "Sounder", Bob Radnitz, who had produced the first film and produced "Part 2, Sounder" made a decision not to use Cicely Tyson and Paul Winfield and was it David Hooks. Kevin Hooks, I guess it was or both of them. What was the basis of that decision and why did he move away from a successful formula in terms of name actors etc. to actors who were very good excellent but were somewhat unknown? What was the basis of that? Was it strictly a financial situation? Or was it a question of necessity?

Leonard Herring 00:13:58.910
I think I think it was a real social thing as far as Bob is concerned. He felt that you know you can use a Cicely and a Paul Winfield and a Sidney Poitier. You continue using. But I think that his objective was that there are a lot of other Back actors and actresses around that should be used.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:14:19.080
As you were saying the decision was made to bring in these new actors. And it certainly does give an opportunity for Black actors to get a chance to be seen and to be explored. And with in a sense the paucity particularly of serious Black films it does raise a question as to how do Back people, Black actors get a chance to display their wares in films. And I guess that's one reason why Bob Radnitz decided to use Harold Sylvester and Ebony Wright. But do you think that's had any effect on the film? Do you think that this might have had some effect on the drawing power of the film?

Leonard Herring 00:14:56.790
Definitely. It's no question that when you have somebody like Cecily and Paul Winfield, very successful, that most people when they hear the "Sounder " name they first ask whether or not Cicely is going to be it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:15:11.190
And you've been all over the country.

Leonard Herring 00:15:12.380
right.[crosstalk] Right. You know[crosstalk]I 've heard it and I think that it's almost a sacrifice on Bob's part. But I'm not plugging a new movie. But you know he is using Paul Winfield and Cicely in another movie that'll be coming out in '77. And being filmed now as a matter of fact.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:15:33.620
That's "A Hero Ain't Nothin' But a Sandwhich" [crosstalk] based on the New York playwright Alice Childress' play.

Leonard Herring 00:15:39.430
Right

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:15:39.821
And it is true I wasn't trying to spot any one particular producer. But it does raise a question about the industry. There really is a paucity of serious dramatic roles for Black actors and Black actresses. And when a serious one comes along generally the producers ask for Cicely or Paul or James Earl Jones or Sidney or somebody like that, who are very good excellent people. But we have such a reservoir of great talent in our community that it really is too bad that there aren't more vehicles that can really display the talent. And this goes back to something we were talking about early in the show. And that is how can we not only promote more serious Black films, but how can we get Black films that are on substantive topics partially historical? For example has been no film about Frederick Douglass. There's another great Black man who recently passed away Paul Robeson and it's been very limited amount about Paul Robeson there's something on television and we had the development of the archives that people are beginning to identify with. But we we haven't had a serious film about Harriet Tubman or a serious film about Mary McLeod Bethune or even a serious film about the civil rights movement itself. So there [crosstalk] we have it. I've already written five plots.

Leonard Herring 00:17:00.391
Yeah well I think the thinking here goes Black to I think we, you know as Black folks who have financial capital, if we can get into the business, can learn about the business so that we can take that and invest money in these type thing. And I'm I'm very happy that we had an opportunity as a firm to to handle a total film to have the you know, to handle it totally. That that means I'm learning a lot about what's going on and being able to get this out. Because at this point I'm finding that once a guy like Paul Robeson passes away you know you're gonna find somebody out there with some money will come and say it's a great idea and go and put them one up and do it. And yet probably not even have really total substance of what we're all about what we're talking about. So I think it goes back to maybe a problem that we as Blacks are going to have to .. salute and

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:17:55.841
We've I had several people from the Black entertainment film business on our show over the years. Most recently Cliff Frazier of federal media. And we've been talking about the problems of packaging of Back films or films about anything. And it is a very expensive proposition. It's a highly speculative proposition. And it is one of the problems that Blacks find in almost any area of business. Because what you're suggesting is that persistence and pressure is a good part of the game. And it's certainly true. Now you said you had an opportunity to participate in the promotion of "Part 2 Sounder" from top to bottom. What does that entail? What are some of the things that you did? And what are some of the new things that you learned as a result of this experience?

Leonard Herring 00:18:43.090
Well I learned first of all that that the putting of the film is in segments. I mean you start with I guess no one would be the idea of the screenplay. Then you go from the actors or the participants. And then you go into the actual production and then into promotion down the line. And I think those segments are highly highly speculative, highly competitive. To the fact I know in San Francisco when Taj Mahal was not did not know when the film was gonna be put on the market. And he was, you know he wrote the music for it. But I had to sit and explain to him that basically it's a segment situation. You know you wrote the music. You're finished with that we go to another phase of it [unintelligible word here] the line. And I think he felt somewhat of a left out, left out of the thing as opposed to being involved.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:19:40.692
Because that is one of the things about creative activities like film and television. Much of your work is compartmentalized. And whereas the public sees the person in front of the camera or behind a microphone and hears the person behind the microphone. There are a lot of other things that go into it. And sometimes even that person who's in front of the camera doesn't really know all of the things that it took to get him or her there and all of the things that it takes to do the type of promotion that goes on. Of course one of the things that you're saying now is that particularly in the Black entertainment community we need to have better communication among ourselves.

Leonard Herring 00:20:16.691
Exactly. No question about it.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:20:18.161
There are not a lot of us. And therefore the informal network that develops in any particular profession needs to be even more effective among Black performers producers actors and the like. And I do think that some of that is emerging. There is somewhat of a grapevine. But beyond that we need to get into the whole question of influencing decisions about films. For example were you able to significantly influence many decisions in" Part 2 Sounder"? Or was your role one of being involved but eventually the people put up the money make the decision?

Leonard Herring 00:21:00.770
I can safely say, Dr. Brown, that I was totally involved. Let's say over 50 percent involved in the total promotion of this film. I think that there were some things that were done a little before I got there. So I can't really. But I can say that the advice, the consultation that I gave the powers that be was accepting.Of course it's one of the problems that Blacks face in many fields. Politics helped in a political campaign. T hat someone high above with power and money makes the decision. And then some of us or Blacks come in and are asked to come in and try to make the best of that particular decision. For example, not necessarily with "Sounder, Part 2" but in many Back films. The suggestion is why isn't there more intensive promotion and showing right in the Black community. Why doesn't the film open in the Black community? in our cause. The argument is that most people including Black people go downtown to see movies and so on. And that there are a lot of films "Shaft" and "Superfly "and so on that open downtown and are very successful. But there is this feeling particularly among Backs who are more nationalistic in orientation that things that directly deal with our culture really should at least for the first week or two or what have you start in our community. And of course in New York City, as you well aware, our largest Black communitiy is not Harlem anymore. Our largest Black community is Brooklyn. And so then we get into the fact that business and theaters basically have sort of left the neighborhood circumstance. But there are still films Those theaters on Flatbush Avenue they're still theaters on Fulton Street. There are still places where they could open. But how do you respond to that?. Because I am not suggesting that you made the decision. But it is a decision about promoting Black films that a number of people raise. Well certainly that in itself is a problem of locations. Some of us say well if you opened down there would the masses with the majority community go there. I've always abandoned feeling that that whites if they want to see something they go to in fact they go to our community much when we go in there. And so that argument I have to agree with you. I think somehow we should make some changes like that.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:23:31.151
Because inferential you're also saying that in order for a film to really be successful it has to have a fairly significant white audience.

Leonard Herring 00:23:39.800
Exactly.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:23:40.671
And that is because not Black people don't patronize films. But it does require a lot of dollars to reimburse the people who made and promoted the film. I think I once heard to figure it takes a couple of three million dollars to make the film and a couple of three million dollars to distribute the film. Which means you've got about six or seven million dollars to clear before you begin to make any money back. And I also heard a figure that something like eight out of ten films don't really, you know, distributed by you major producers, distributors don't really make money. So they really depend on two or three,m aybe 30 percent to.[crosstalk] What do you say? It may be made you maybe I let you knowThat don't make money so it's really counting on this blockbuster to go through. And of course when we talk about Black films we really had very few blockbusters. I guess the "Shaft" and "Superfly" and "Sounder" have been really major blockbusters. Zach "River Niger", which was a film and had tremendous impact in terms of Black struggle, has been somewhat successful. But it certainly hasn't had people standing in lines around the corner to get there. And then of course we've had these Blaxploitation films like "Mandingo" and films of that type that have people twisted around the block three times to see a slave. Now Alex Haley's film "Roots" is going to be shown on ABC, which is a new development. You know that's the book, right you know tracing Haley's background back to Africa. And I will be very interested in that particular development. Are you going to be involved in that project?

Leonard Herring 00:25:20.780
I don't know yet.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:25:21.410
You would hope so.

Leonard Herring 00:25:22.221
I' d hope so. It's gonna look like ..it's going to be a winner.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:24.650
Yeah because that really is the type of project. It looks like it's going to move along. Well let's talk a little bit more about some of the problems that you as a business person has in organizing, promoting, developing a Black business which in this instance happens to be public relations.

Leonard Herring 00:25:44.240
Well basically I think deep deep down I don't know. You know I started my business in Cincinnati, Ohio about nine years ago.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:25:51.711
You mean a home of the "Cincinnati Reds"?

Leonard Herring 00:25:53.001
Right. Right.[laughter] [crosstalk]. And I relocated to Los Angeles about a year and a half ago. And I find that it's not so much a... sure we have problems and money and problems of other things. But I try to go into the situation totally business. And yet with the idea that that I realize once I came in who I am I know don't try to depend solely say on the Black community to at least run my business. But yet in everything I'm involved that I try to include. And I think that the other problem is that we have in many cases that we feel that even Blacks and whites feel that maybe a Black in a field it's not good is having a say I won a majority today. So that's basically most of the problems that I ..

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:26:48.980
That's a problem that practically every Black person in every field faces. And even now the feel of the nationalist revolution the Black revolution, whatever you want to call it, has Black awareness has caused many people, Black people in particular, to recognize that Black's abilities are randomly distributed just like whites. And given the same opportunities they can do as well and better. And we have ample examples of that in sports and in medicine and entertainment and law and so on. But nonetheless the prevailing feeling still is that the mountain is a little bit higher. In fact It's a lot higher to climb for Blacks in a comparable situation with comparable abilities because of the pervasive racism that exists in our society. What are some of the things that you've done personally to try to overcome that particular obstacle?

Leonard Herring 00:27:40.340
Well I think you know here again trying to be the best at what I do and to at least go in with the idea of not having any feelings that that might be against me because I am Black. I happen to be I happen to think that I'm a PR man who happens to be Black. But I'm good. And I feel that we are in any field to be successful we have to do it better and we are better. And that's my whole philosophy.

Dr. Roscoe C .Brown 00:28:08.091
Of course that's the message we deliver I guess week after week on "Soul of Reason". That is Black people analyze their problems and strive to deal with their problems. That excellence has to be the byword. And this excellence does help to overcome the racism that we all face. And of course once you deliver your service and once people become aware of what you can do, you've made it. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Leonard Herring, who's a public relations specialist, who's been working in the promotion of" Part 2 Sounder"..

