Dr. Roscoe C. BrownSpeaker 1 00:00:01.900
In the summer of 1974 the Gateway National Recreation Area began operation. This was one of the first urban parks sponsored by the federal government. Here Diane Harris, William Kornblum and Frances Gibson discuss public involvement in the planning for the Gateway National Recreation Area on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:42.691
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr Roscoe C Brown, Jr.Speaker 1 00:01:09.270
Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" are from the Gateway National Recreation Area which is a federal park conducted by the Department of Interior. With us Diane Harris who is public involvement assistant, Frances Gibson who is recreation specialist and William Kornblum who is on the planning board for the National Recreation Area. Possibly Frances we could begin by having you tell our audience exactly what the Gateway National Recreation Area is. It's spread all over New York and it's a little difficult to pin it down. I think it would be important for the audience to know this.

Frances Gibson 00:01:44.640
Roscoe we have 26000 acres of national park lands that consist of former military city and state parks. The headquarters for this Gateway National Recreation Area is at Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn. We have the Jamaica Bay unit, Breezy Point unit and Staten Island unit in New York, and then in Sandy Hook's New Jersey. We have Fort Hancock over there which was a surplus military lands. We have Fort Wadsworth at Staten Island. We have Fort Tilden and Breezy Point and along with Floyd Bennett Field so our big problem here of course is to try to develop this park in conjunction with the input from citizens in and around the area.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:32.630
And did you mention Riis Park because I know many of the citizens of New York will remember Riis Park which I guess many citizens still think is a City park? But I understand it's part of the Gateway National Recreation Area.

Frances Gibson 00:02:43.861
Riis Park it is definitely part of the Gateway National Recreation Area and it's part of the Breezy Point unit. And of course that's in the area adjacent to Fort Tilden.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:52.950
Now Bill the idea of developing a national park in an urban area is somewhat new as many people in the audience know the great national parks of this country are out in the wilderness. Now why did the federal government respond to the demands of urban people for more involvement of the federal government in recreation by setting up this Gateway National Recreation Area?

William Kornblum 00:03:21.270
Well Rosco, the idea goes back to the latter days of the Johnson Administration under Secretary of interior Udall and then under Secretary of Interior Hickel in the early Nixon Administration. The idea was to bring parks to the people where the people are. It's very clear that many, many people in our major cities can't reach the big parks of the West and the Southwest and the creation of Gateway National Recreation Area right in the City and on adjacent beaches was an attempt to really bring federal parks to people in the major concentrations of our population.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr 00:03:56.220
And of course in the Jamaica Bay Area tremendous amount of open land, some of it swamp land. But it's land where there's a lot of nature. I know you have some birdwatching there. There's some excellent undersea life there that you can be looked at so that in a sense it is sort of natural that there be a national park in New York, in New York City, in a metropolitan area. Now you had said prior to the show this was only one of two or three national parks in urban areas. Could you tell us where the others are?

William Kornblum 00:04:29.540
Well the original urban national park is in Washington D.C. what's called the National Capital Parks. The National Park Service and Department of Interior run all the monuments and green spaces within the city of Washington and that's considered National Capital Parks. The other major urban national park is in the city of San Francisco and the San Francisco Bay area. That's called Golden Gate National Recreation Area. That's our sister Park, sister to our Gateway National Recreation Area here in New York and New Jersey. And I see so in a sense this park is an experiment and part of the success of the experiment will be the extent to which we get citizens involved in both planning the park and using the park. So Diane I'd like to ask you what has been done to date to help deal with the public's involvement in the park? And of course in New York City we have and the metropolitan area have people from all ethnic backgrounds, religious groups, economic levels, racial groups etc. and that does really involve a tremendous amount of planning. So what's been done to date?

Diane Harris 00:05:41.050
Okay. What we have is a public involvement team which consists of right now six members and we've been collecting various mailing lists and we've been informing people through letters about Gateway and insisting that we come to see them and talk to them a little about Gateway. One of our constraints is that the mailing lists are not up to date.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:06:09.671
Now that's very interesting. As a typical public relations person you turn immediately to mailing lists out explains the mailing list I'd update. But there are literally millions of people walking the streets of New York City and New Jersey and so on. What else are you doing? I'm not trying to overly criticize you but I want to focus on the fact that we do have to reach out and get those people.

Diane Harris 00:06:31.271
Exactly. OK. We've been getting out to people, receiving references from people who are really interested in Gateway and they've also been referring us to other people that we can talk to to inform them about Gateway and the various workshops that will be coming into view in October. We've developed a newsletter which is called Gateway Outlook which will become... a second edition of the newsletter will be coming out in October. And we hope to be sending that out to all people that we've been in contact with and hopefully the people that come to the workshops as well.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:07.960
Now one of the things I found very interesting is that a lot of people don't really know what Gateway is and consistent with the role of "Soul of Reason" we try to interpret to the Black and minority community some of the things that are happening in terms of their life space. Now why is it that a lot of people still don't know that Riis Park is a part of a national park and they still think it's a city park?. Now I think that's a minor issue in one sense but it's a major issue in terms of getting the scope of this Gateway Park over to people particularly people from minority communities because a number of people from minority communities use Riis Park. What about that Diane and why or why is it that we haven't gotten that across and what are you doing to try to get that across?

Diane Harris 00:07:50.260
Well all I can say at this point is that we're doing everything possible to inform minority people as well as the overall urban area about Riis Park and who it belongs to as of now. Through our talks, in meeting with people we've been trying to express the fact that Jacob Riis Beach, excuse me, is no longer a part of the City but is now taken over by the federal government. And hopefully they can spread the word to others about the park

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:24.192
One way of doing that of course is to show that there is an improvement in service. And Frances and I'd like to ask you to what extent has there been an improvement in service to the people of this metropolitan area now that one of our great park resources Riis Park, Great Kills Park are now taken over by the federal government?Because as a taxpayer as a citizen I would like to say well this means improvement of service and expansion of program. Now what is being done along those lines?

Frances Gibson 00:08:54.102
Well Roscoe you're right. It does mean the fact that the National Park Service has taken over these this park means that the services have improved. Now the parks are clean. We have our park police for security. We have the type of services there that will enable the citizens to come and use the park and be safe you know be secure and they have clean wholesome facilities in the parks now. And many of these things just didn't happen before. And we've had a long time working in cleaning up the park to make it to bring it up to the type of standards that the National Park Service insists upon. And of course it takes manpower and it takes time. But the other thing is that we also have certain responsibilities for public input as we develop the park. So what we have been doing for the last two years just sort of maintaining the park in the manner in which the people can use it and can be exposed to the park. While the planning team develops our immediate, intermediate and long range plans for these parks.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:02.270
Now Bill you're on, Bill Kornblum you're with the City University.I believe your field is sociology. You're on the planning team and of course planning involves people and it involves program. Now it's nice to have a park that's physically clean and you can get to and so on. What are some of the things that you're considering in your planning?

William Kornblum 00:10:20.890
I think the key, that's really the key question Roscoe. A lot of people think of planning and development in terms of building and pouring of concrete and creating new structures but in this day and age I think we need to think more and more in terms of organization and bringing people's talents and energies to focus on particular places and particular kinds of activities and this is the ideal. This this new national park in New York City is an ideal place just for that kind of thing. I would say that our biggest problem is reaching out as you were pointing to before reaching out to people with talent and with ability from all the communities of the city but particularly from the minority communities of the city to get their culture and their ways of expression and their talents in our national park. At Floyd Bennett Field at Riis Park and the other places where we have opportunities to put on programs. As an indication of the kind of thing that is being done, I know Frances won't talk about this himself because he doesn't like to blow his own horn, but we had some emergency legislation passed last summer to create new jobs for people in New York City because of the high unemployment. Frances capitalized on that emergency legislation which created funds for a Youth Conservation Corps program and in one week's time Frances Gibson organized a camp at Gateway National Recreation Area where he had counselors, an environmental education program and young people hired on a weekly wage who were also in an educational program and all of this was accomplished in the space of one one week. It was an emergency program which Frances Gibson and the other people who worked with him put together. This is the kind of thing I'm talking about. We need more and more to be able to capitalize on existing resources, human and social, that we have at our disposal and frequently just don't have the time or the knowledge to be able to marshal you know.

Dr Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:12:21.651
Now Diane as the public involvement assistant you were involved in a campaign that's going to hit the citizens of the metropolitan area immediately, like in the next two or three weeks. Could you tell us about this particular plan? I think you call it your workshop program. Would you tell us what the workshops are, what they intended to accomplish, and how people might become involved in them?

Diane Harris 00:12:45.840
Okay. The workshops will be are scheduled for October. They will give people an opportunity to express what they would like to see in the park. So what if they have any grievances about the park. It will give them a chance to express these grievances and tell us what they would like to see. Whereas we would bring them back to the planners and they would you know formulate some type of scenario so that we can bring them back out to the public. It is important that people come to these workshops because it's their park okay. It's very important that they come out to the workshops and develop a rapport with the people who are trying to help develop their park. Those workshops are scheduled for as follows October 1st at 730 pm. Floyd Bennett Field building 2702 Flatbush Avenue Brooklyn New York October 4th one o'clock PM Sandy Hook Chapel Fort Hancock Sandy Hook New Jersey.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:55.820
Now I believe there will also be workshops on the 8th 9th 11th and 14th with the one at the 14th being in New York at the City University Center. Anyone who is interested in getting information about these workshops should call 2 5 2 8 1 0 1. Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" have been Diane Harris, William Kornblum and Frances Gibson of the Gateway National Recreation Area.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:14:26.560
This evening we are talking about the Gateway National Recreation Area and ways of improving citizen participation. We're talking with Diane Harris, Frances Gibson and William Kornblum. Now as we talk about citizen participation if you were to ask me as a citizen to come to a meeting like a workshop I'd say What am I going to say? What are you going to do about what I'm concerned about? For example you have a big area in Jamaica, Jamaica Bay. I'm an inner city resident. I can't reach it. I don't know anything about birdwatching etc.. What do you expect from me? What do you want to do for me? Now Frances someone asked you the question what are some of the innovative programs that you have in mind for the park? Because I know you have some ideas of this type.

Frances Gibson 00:15:18.301
Right Roscoe one of the things that we should explain here is we have two teams we have this planning team and they are concerned about intermediate and long range plans but we also have to operate the park on a day to day basis. And I'm part of this operational team and some of the things that we do of course is we, for example we have a youth program. And Bill Kornblum mentioned the YCC program. It was an abbreviated program that we ran this past summer. But as a result of being involved in the YCC program now there a possibility of us having a Job Corps center here. We have a lot of land, a lot of buildings out there and it's our business to come up with programs that will utilize these facilities. So as soon as we wrap up the YCC reports then our next project will be as project manager for the Job Corps.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:16:13.040
Now tell us what the YCC people did. I think Bill described dramatically how you put these people together but what did they do once they got there?

Frances Gibson 00:16:21.190
All right then I should say that the YCC. is of course environmental education activity and these young people working on projects they had 40 hour week and 30 hours will work projects and 10 hours had to have an environmental education lesson involved with it and there are projects for the most part were developed in conjunction with how they related to the environment. These students were recruited through their schools and they had an interest in the environment so they came into our program at Floyd Bennett Field and we had various work projects had to do with the nature study trails had to do with the marine life around the Gateway and the environment education teacher went right along with them and in fact doing the project. She could stop a work project and explain how these various things fit into the environment. We really had only 31 young people involved Roscoe ,15 boys and 15 girls and they were a cross-section of the community but we only had room for 30 but during that time we had 31 people which means one young man had to take another job because of transportation. But we had 25 of these young people had a perfect attendance during a four week period so you can understand how interested they were. And of course the need is there. So we expect to continue the YCC program next year. Maybe we'll have two camps maybe one at Sandy Hook New Jersey. We certainly would have an enlarged camp at Floyd Bennett Field and hopefully we can continue to work with the young people in this area to provide some outlets for them provide a recreation programs of course which is my basic thing here but also to expose them to the Gateway National Recreation Area and its programs and the environments here and begin to build the clientele among all citizens for using the parks.

Dr Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:18:20.920
Now Bill and as we look at that large facility Floyd Bennett Field out in Brooklyn right off Flatbush Avenue. What are some of the things that can be done with it? Now you know the government is known to take facilities they don't need anymore and then dump them on the public. Now what's going to be done? Are they going to tear down some of those buildings? Are they going to reconstruct them and use them for things other than office space? Because a tremendous amount of area out there and I hear sometimes they have model airplane races and so on but that's almost like what it was constructed for, fly airplanes. But there must be some other things that might be considered there. As a member the planning team I'm sure you must have some ideas along those lines.

William Kornblum 00:19:05.380
We're considering quite a range of possibilities. The number of requests that we have from the public is already staggering. Here are some of the proposals that have been suggested to the planning team and that are being seriously considered. There are six miles of runways on that old airfield and some portion of that can be used as a drag strip for for people who are into that kind of activity in Brooklyn and Queens and elsewhere around the city. Another portion of those runways could be developed into tennis courts because the surfaces are right there already. We have we have approximately 100 buildings on Floyd Bennett Field about 30 of them are large hangars. Well not quite 30 maybe 10 large hangars which would accommodate the various kinds of year round recreation. We have a hockey proposal to make one of them into a hockey rink with outdoor and indoor ice for figure skating and organized hockey leagues. And there's also quite a heavy demand for roller hockey which is a growing sport in the City. There's quite a bit of sentiment that we should have accommodations for small boat owners not large boats, yachts, but rowboats and small fishing boats so that a person living in an apartment house in Bedford Stuyvesant or even in Manhattan could leave the boat out in one of these huge hangars that we have at Floyd Bennett Field and come out on a day off for a weekend and have that boat put in the water out there and go fishing in Jamaica Bay. The fishing in Jamaica Bay is superb as you probably know.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr 00:20:38.682
One of the things I know you've talked about is the transportation problem because if the parks are really going to serve the entire metropolitan area it means more than serving the residents who live a mile or so away. And given the fact that all of these parks or segments of your park on the water sides of the islands of New York in New Jersey what are you gonna do about transportation? Is there going to be cheaper transportation? Are you going to have buses that are established mainly to take people there? Are you going to have express trains? What are some of the things you're going to do about that? I'll ask Bill Kornblum to answer that question

William Kornblum 00:21:14.679
Transportation is a very difficult issue Roscoe partly because the National Park Service is not a transportation agency. Changes in the transportation service to the park are going to have to be the result of a lot of public sentiment and pressure on Congress, the congressional delegations here, to get funds for us to improve the transportation we need to cooperate with the City and the State and the other agencies. But there's a lot that can be done.

Dr Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:21:41.030
Your are a great candidate for politics. That was a very usual answer. Bureaucrats. I'm being a little facetious, but that is the tendency: Well it's not our bailiwick it's somebody else's. Now being realistic about it, there is no federal transportation service here. How do you expect to get minority people people who live in the heart of Bed Sty and the Bronx et cetera to this park? It is possible to work colllaboratively with the transportation agency to have special buses that go there. It is possible to negotiate reduced fares? And I believe having heard you talk before you are thinking about some of those things. This is why I added a little humor to it but I also want to point up to citizens and our listeners that there are some other possibilities.

William Kornblum 00:22:31.670
You're right. Roscoe I mean there has to be cheaper transportation. The key to the success of this park will be that. We have to have better bus service from the Flatbush Avenue subway we've got to have better bus service on Staten Island we have to have express bus service from the communities closer to Manhattan. We've got to have ferry service and we've got to have a ferry service which is subsidized to some extent because it becomes prohibitively expensive. And all these things are possible but they're all I was trying to say was that they're not the park, the Park Service is the tail of the dog. And we've got to try to develop a demand. We've got to try to develop a park which has got attractive programs. And once we start doing that people are going to start demanding that they be able to get there.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr 00:23:19.980
All right now Diane that brings us to the public involvement. Now you're going to have these workshops which begin on October 1st and go through the 14th and you're hoping that citizens will come. They're going to be workshops at each one of the park sites in Great Kills, Sandy Hook and Breezy Point etc.. Now what's going to be done at those workshops? So what can you tell our audience that's going to happen that's gonna be exciting that will make them want to come other than just basically their citizen duty?

Diane Harris 00:23:50.520
Okay. It's gonna give them a chance to express their ideas and to hopefully see some of their ideas come into being in the near future. Hopefully it'll give them a chance to express grievances if they have any with the park. It will also give them a chance to see some of the people be introduced to some of the people who are you know in charge of the park and who are willing to help them develop this park.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr 00:24:17.880
I see now the sessions will at various times some at 1:00 and some at 7:30 and as we suggested earlier those interested in attending these sessions should contact the Gateway National Recreation Area at 2 5 2 8 1 0 1. I believe the one on October 1st is at Floyd Bennett Field October 4th at Sandy Hook October 8 at Great Kills Park October 9th in Newark at the Howard Johnson Motor Lodge. October 11th at Breezy Point at Fort Tilden Chapel building and the basic New York City meeting is at the City University Graduate Center which is located on Forty second Street and that will be at 7:30 pm on October 14th. Now when those folks come to those meetings are they going to be assigned to specific topic areas or are they going to work as a group to try to work out their grievances or are they going to hear speeches or what what's going to happen?

Diane Harris 00:25:19.780
They're not going to be assigned to any particular group or any particular topic. It's their workshop okay They're going to be the ones who decide what types of things they want done. There's not going to be any set format exactly who's going to be the ringleader of the you know of the workshops. Everyone's gonna have their chance their fair chance to express their needs and what they like to see in the parks. OK. There's not going to be a leader or someone who's going to dominate who's going to be the true professional type person. Everyone's going to be there to do their own thing so to speak.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:01.660
Now is there going to be a follow up to the workshop? Because obviously when people present grievances and program ideas someone on staff has to take them and synthesize them and decide what to do about them. What kind of follow up is there going to be?

Diane Harris 00:26:13.740
Exactly. There will definitely be a follow up and hopefully the way I see it is that we'll write down just about all the things that people have said and expressed, get letters out to these people to make sure that everything that they've said is on this on this list. If not they can write reply to us and tell us: Well you didn't put this down, or this isn't exactly what we said. This is how it's supposed to be read after we receive that back hopefully we can comply and try and understand what people are saying to us

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:50.341
And I believe you plan to develop a tentative master plan for operation of the park which will be presented in three or four months to the rest of the community to evaluate. Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" have been Diane Harris, Frances Gibson and William Kornblum of the Gateway National Recreation Area and they have been talking about ways of involving the public in the planning of this national park here in New York City.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:27:15.970
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

