Speaker 1 00:00:01.320
Jesse Owens. Fritz Pollard Hank McDonnell Alice Coachman Josh Gibson. What do these black athletes have in common. Charles Mays and Herb Douglas of the black athletes Hall of Fame will give you the answer on tonight's sole reason.

Speaker 2 00:00:36.140
This is Soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 3 00:01:03.740
With us on tonight soul sole reason Charles Mays director of the black athletes Hall of Fame and heard Herb Douglas vice president of Schifrin Corporation and chairman of the board of the black athletes Hall of Fame. Glad to have you fellows with us tonight. Thank you Roscoe. Now Charles let's get right into the discussion of the black athletes Hall of Fame. Exactly what is it and what is its significance of black athletes Hall of Fame as a foundation to honor.

Speaker 4 00:01:32.430
All time black athletes who have never been on it before. I mean why. Because the color we ask we started this Hall of Fame back in 1968 to organize it. How to get together to honor black athletes Hall of Fame black athletes members. Back in 1960 when Carlos and Tommie Smith means their hand. I came with the idea. They did it back in 1920. They had been tarred and feathered. So they got together with Herb Douglas and Bill Cosby with the comp of the idea of forming a Hall of Fame to honor these such athletes as Hank McDonald. Palette.

Speaker 5 00:02:08.000
Well you are a world class athlete yourself. And it's interesting that you got into this frequently people who get into organizing testimonials and honors for athletes sportswriters or wealthy people et cetera. Are you an athlete. And have quite a reputation yourself as this herb but his day is about that day when you are honoring those folks but getting a little but the point is that you know you're pretty close to your competitive years and you know a lot of the modern day black stars and probably as a kid you heard about some of the older black stars but what really motivated you to create this idea. Well I created the idea because.

Speaker 4 00:02:59.590
I like to deal with youth and I felt that we are losing our youth today and to sports we can handle our youth and carry on who we are and hold our head up high. And I know when you take the day modern sports blacks dominate the sports world but yet they cannot hold our head up high because they lose respect for one another. I felt that to the black athletes Hall of Fame we can have people to come and visit the museum and see the old captains at the time in the past and that we could instill in them that they started and have a backbone in sports. I see an herb union executive with Shiffman corporation and you also are a former world class athlete a few years ago.

Speaker 5 00:03:44.300
And yet you're in this too and you know some of the older athletes as well as some of the younger athletes. What motivated you to get into this. Well number one I wanted to assist Charlie and he had the intestinal fortitude to go out there first with his idea.

Speaker 6 00:04:03.860
And I knew that he needed assistance. And the irony of the whole thing. He was a long jumper like myself and there's 20 years different as to the time we competed in the Olympic Games. I was a medalist in the 48 game and he was in 68. But I think we have something in common in that we were in the same event and being in the long jump. You were in an event psychologically where you know you're not in the limelight and there are many athletes that aren't in the limelight. That should have been. And that was in yester year. I think this is what motivated me most. I knew that I had train it was a self-satisfaction. But still we never gain the recognition that we should have. And when I say that we never got the news coverage like other athletes. And Charlie I perhaps if he were psychoanalyze he would find out that this perhaps was in a recessive drive that put him in the vein to start the black athletes Hall of Fame. And I went right along with him.

Speaker 7 00:05:06.330
Now who are some of the people in the black athletes Hall of Fame. We might run down this list of people that we began the show with because actually all of them are in the black athletes Hall of Fame. Well actually Joe laws Jesse Owens. And Sugar Ray Robinson who pound for pound was a great as.

Speaker 8 00:05:25.790
Alice Coachman very few people knew she was the first black woman to win an Olympic gold medal.

Speaker 9 00:05:33.540
I'll see a Gibson buddy yo Monte Irvin Henry air Willie Mays.

Speaker 7 00:05:40.800
Bill Russell you mentioning some of you whose careers really have just ended like Hank is still playing ball and Willie just finished last year. Yet you said it was to honor black athletes of yester year. Now are you just trying this to flavor it with some big names that everybody knows to add some status to it or is there some other particular reason for bringing in people like Bill Russell and Hank Aaron and Willie my and my thoughts and all that.

Speaker 6 00:06:10.260
But I think Charlie can elaborate on it because they were on a selective committee.

Speaker 7 00:06:14.190
Not only that we're also honoring like Hank McDowell Fritz. Can you tell the audience who Hank McKnight Hank for a job was a first professional football player to get paid. Fritz Pollard was the first black All-American and then you have and Fritz Pollard played at Brown University. And I was 19 and was one of the first pros when he organized his own team and he organized this whole thing is played against George Halas. Then you also have you also have Jack Twyman who helped mama with Stokes. Then you have a house very important when you mentioned Jack time and because he's not Black Jack Fineman is white. Yet you call this the black athletes Hall of Fame. I know some of the things I'm asking you in a sense controversial but whenever you stick out there and put your neck out and step out you have to be prepared to deal with those things and I'm sure that you are because you've heard these questions before. But specifically why did you put Jack Twyman the white man in a black athletes Hall of Fame. Not that I'm suggesting that it should be segregated but I just want to know the exact reason for it. Well you know some white men had to go out and take that blunt and put blacks in sports and major sports. You take a Branch Rickey and JACK TWYMAN is Branch Rickey and the Black Panthers. Branch Rickey is in them all fame because everybody knows branch victim because what he did for Jackie Robinson had the fortitude out there to stand what he did for the country by making baseball an integrated sport. He did it for Jackie but mainly it was for the country. Right. And that was the start.

Speaker 10 00:07:45.210
And also you take Jack Twyman now Hey Mama I wish those came a cripple an inhabited. He could not get around and Jack to really actually adopted this man and took him to his death. And this is why we we are honoring any man white black or any other color that help blacks get ahead in today's sports in today's world.

Speaker 11 00:08:06.610
And of course whenever you make selections there's always a certain amount of criticism certainly it can be no criticism about stars like Jesse Owens and Joe Lewis that everybody knows about someone like Josh Gibson was probably the greatest home run hitter who ever played ball and played in the black leagues before blacks were able to get into the big leagues. The other big leagues we should say. But there is a certain amount of criticism whenever you select the athletes. Do you have a selection committee. How can anyone be nominated for the black athletes Hall of Fame. What does it take to get in. I know in the Baseball Hall of Fame you have to have something like 60 some percent of the votes in order to make it through. Now how do you select your people for the black athletes Hall of Fame.

Speaker 10 00:08:55.830
Well the first selection was selected by all new and famous newsmen and newsmen around the country. We sent our nominations to all the newsmen around the country.

Speaker 7 00:09:06.880
Now and you say all the newsmen you mean black newsmen black and white newsmen all around the country the famous top newsman also a good example of some of those. You got Sam Lacy the other half he's a black sports reporter who's been writing sports for years right the dean of black sports reporters in a sense.

Speaker 12 00:09:23.430
And Dick Edwards also who's with the book Black athletes all female was editor of the black sports magazine. Then you have Doc young and Ebony magazine who helped out a great deal. Then you have one of the controversies we faced at a press conference was Dick Young at the Daily News. He said Why are black athletes Hall of Fame. They wrote an editorial on it I recall right. But then a year later changes might actually want to be worked out or be part of the black athletes Hall of Fame because he thought it was a segregated organization just to separate American today. But he's seen that so we talk to him and he reasoning that it's bringing America closer together. That's an interesting point because a number of people really don't understand that whenever you set up a Black Academy of Arts and Science or arts and letters or you set up a black scientist's organization or you set up a black athletes Hall of Fame immediately some folks both white and black say you're trying to segregate blacks all over again. Now actually how do you deal with that particular argument. Well very simple because we well we can get the white and black to get together with blacks. We've got a group of blacks together as to get respect one another and once we respect ourselves White will respect us because they respect the dolls the sense and on a respect known as Muhammad Ali they respect Joe Lewis Because he's a big time athlete a way out in the head. But I think we're going to lose man. We'll get a PR man to publicize Hank MacDonald way back in. He would be a superstar today. So what we've got to do is get our young and blacks together and say OK this is our heritage and we've got to get together and we are. We do have something to be proud of. Now White will join the band bandwagon but we're not trying to segregate them whatsoever.

Speaker 13 00:11:05.850
Let's pursue that a little bit. Herb might want to comment on that. There is some logical inconsistency and two on one hand we've been fighting to get into the Hall of Fame a baseball Hall of Fame football et cetera et cetera. And even in the case of baseball through the pressure largely of blacks and some whites black ballplayers from the black leagues are now eligible for full fledge entrance into the Hall of Fame. They don't have a separate corner which was originally proposed. I do have a separate nomination committee but they also have a separate old timers nomination committee which is somewhat consistent now Charlie's point is that black people have to respect themselves in order to be able to go and compete in the larger world which is certainly true. But the question is does one really need a black athletes Hall of Fame in order to respect oneself. Maybe you might want to comment.

Speaker 6 00:12:02.400
I can elaborate one step further on that. I actually believe that the old black athlete needed needs the actual identity as to what he accomplished in the area that he had to go through. The only way that we can bring that to focus today is by letting the people know in a way to demonstrate and this is a portion of a part of demonstration that what the black athlete did yester year and not only today and then there's a sense of pride. Well I'm very emotional on the pride situation as to what the black athlete did yesterday. Yester year and also what he is doing today. And I had a talk not too long ago with a great entertainer which was out of the field.

Speaker 8 00:12:52.440
Of sports and he said you know her. I may 18 obtain great heights as an entertainer. But I get. A greater elation when my own people recognize me and he performs mostly to white audiences. And we trying to sell our own blacks in many ways and they got back to the pride the Polish people. They have an athlete Hall of Fame and only this year Ted Cruz risky. If you recall about five months ago I was put in. There'll be no blacks. I don't think there'll be any blacks in the Polish. There will be whites because the whites have contributed a lot to enable us to reach the heights that we have and the women there. There's a group up in the New England states that are starting to form a woman's athlete I think gala thing. Yeah. Delighting. Billie Jean King. So this is a self pride. This is just a normal reaction. So we're starting to become organized today and doing something of this of this type to do more or less express our pride and accomplishments and our heritage and arm her artistry because that is not true in a racist society that whites think that blacks really never did anything until today.

Speaker 3 00:14:13.740
And the fact is blacks have done everything white people had done and sometimes have done it first. But because of the prejudice that has existed both in the media and in the legalities it kept blacks and whites apart we'll never really know how good the black leagues were because except in a few exhibition games the black league players were never able to play against a white league players and when they did and those exhibition games it turned out the white players as prejudiced as some other world recognized the blacks who were playing at least against them then were just as good.

Speaker 8 00:14:44.700
Not only moreover one step further even the the media getting back to the media. I do a brief research on Mickey Mantle and Willie Mays when they were both in New York over a two year period. And you would be surprised of the news coverage than Mickey Mantle got. Even when Willie Mays surpassed him that particular year and home runs was ahead of him and home runs in others. And this is only done through. The society the way in which we live. I know if I were a writer I'm black I think I would favor maybe a black. That was an athlete. And by the same token this society in which we live. Mickey Mantle got more news coverage and you can count the line. And that's what I did. I counted the line age and it was something like 30 percent more coverage Mickey Mantle guy than than Willie Mays. In the same city.

Speaker 10 00:15:42.180
So this brings up something one of things too that we had our Hall of Famers not consist of all sports and men and women like if we were if we had some people I want to go to see the Hall of Fame in Canton Ohio. They only go see football players. They want to see Jackie what was gonna go to Cooperstown. So what we did was just come all together and it be more reasonable than any other organ visit which we plan to build a hall of fame with all people can visit white black and anybody else so they can know that the first and first Kentucky Derby was won by a black man the first time of any one by a horse I think.

Speaker 14 00:16:20.580
Well yes they had to be driven by true was with low rider but you see. So you're right. The legendary Isaac Murphy right.

Speaker 10 00:16:32.140
Yeah I was looking like you said before and I was saying I was watching the history of the Kentucky Derby. They never went back that far because the fight 14 blank black riders with black enemies and. We don't they used to win their freedom by winning their race but now they just start with Ariel Carrillo and on him and never miss Isaac Murphy or anybody else. So we got to go deeper and find out the roots and where we come from and how we do it and the great is how good we are. We learn any sport or anything we can be the best because we get we hungry for it.

Speaker 11 00:17:04.560
Well that's true. I think it's. Probably the case with practically any deprived group. You notice now that the ascendancy in boxing is moving very rapidly from the black ascendance to Latin ascendance and the one track blacks have to avoid is thinking if we suggest super physical because of some type of physical heritage which might be part of the case but it's mainly how hungry you are and that's why you know Italians have been stars in baseball and boxing and Irish have been stars in football and wrestling and what have you depending upon what becomes indigenous to the particular culture. Because the playground for example has institutionalized basketball in black culture.

Speaker 15 00:17:49.800
When you think about the true black culture we very rarely think about it without thinking of music dance sports but particularly basketball because it's done in a small area. It's done in right in the community. Whereas baseball and football a little bit more detached now that the black population is sort of centered in metropolitan areas when it was centered in the rural areas. We played as much or more baseball than white people in those areas where we actually certain is a basketball was dominated mostly by Jewish people but not by the Black Sea. And then they went from one event another in the black style in the sports and really can dominate and getting a basketball and shoot that again. And the reason for that is that many of the Jewish population were in urban areas built around settlement houses and great teams where ethnic teams the Philadelphia far the South Philadelphia Hebrew Association the original SNL time and our Irish group and blacks had something there too which I'm sure you recognize in the Hall of Fame in the Harlem Renaissance. Which one of the First World's basketball championship and I imagine Bob Douglas is in the black athletes Hall of Fame father and he isn't he should he's nominated in fact I saw him day before yesterday up on 7th Avenue.

Speaker 16 00:19:04.500
But as you can you recall I know Roscoe you go back into the middle forties we had an athlete that was striving and we didn't know which way to go. We were just just starting to break in in college football to any great dimension like when Buddy Young played there were only thirty nine blacks playing college football throughout the United States thirty nine.

Speaker 15 00:19:25.200
And he was one of them and I'm playing football in black and white right.

Speaker 17 00:19:29.440
Very oddly white schools yes. And as a result Buddy was the world's fastest human as you recall in 1944. But he had this unbelievable desire. He was 5 foot 5. He was what you would call a giant a little giant at 5 5. And he made all American in football that same year. You'll see that today because the hunger isn't there as you mentioned before the D.R. but this was he wasn't sure you perhaps was a super athlete.

Speaker 15 00:20:00.090
We have to say that but there would have there would be more super athletes today if the position was then like it is today because I take a slightly different position I think that because of the social conditions that as Charlie said probably today the black athletes are the greatest athlete as a group today as a group. I'm not talking about an individual because any given time on television and you look at basketball you look at track. You look at baseball you look at football you see an unknown black athlete I think it was a young high school student pilot just out of high school. Broke the records and tracked I know Steve Williams for example just out of high school when he gets right. The hundred meter records and things of this type so that it is a cultural phenomenon. I think we both in the same sense seeing the same thing in the years gone by. Was so very very difficult for black athletes to get in.

Speaker 18 00:20:59.730
That it when one did make it. It just hit the world everybody saw it and had a go getter. All of those exigencies today are there so many athletes who can jump as high as you jump that you run as fast as buddy ran. And that's really as far nobody's hit. Yet as far I just guess. That that is true that in every way there is some standard but even Jesse Owens is great brought down a record that no one thought would ever be broken.

Speaker 16 00:21:32.100
Twenty five years it did last. But we are you have to consider that the war came about. I think we had athletes that were. They were moving toward that like a Willie steal. I thought he could have done it had it not. Had he not had to lay out for three years and.

Speaker 15 00:21:49.280
There were also tracks change and equipment change. Compare certain kind of records. But particularly in track isn't completely fair because with the name Paul Del balding the Titan and the artificial turf and so on. I know you want to I haven't I have mentioned this.

Speaker 10 00:22:08.090
Is a little been said and love and just Shannon's side but Bob Beeman jumped twenty nine feet two inches. Could I say it was in the high altitude and of course it gave you more. Let less listen to the wind and all that but that man has broke the record. Nobody ever jumped 28 feet officially. He just broke it an idea this man has not been on it and what is due to us today and I compete against him in an accurate and I say meet and at the Olympics and I think this man was a greatest feat in Olympics in history.

Speaker 16 00:22:40.140
Well that's perhaps one of the greatest feat in athletics of all time. And that's as you know equivalent to approximately a 3 30 mile run being 3.

Speaker 14 00:22:51.190
I want yeah That's right. That's it.

Speaker 16 00:22:52.850
It was equivalent to a pole vault 20 feet two feet away from that. So he's way ahead of his time and I doubt if we'll ever see that broken during our lifetime. However there again there you have the press and they have been rather lax in giving him what was due. Jesse Owens was a PR man within his own right. God gave him everything but we as Blacks know that. That there was a useless Peacock after run just as was his Jesse in a way. Also Metcalf never lost to Jesse. Congressman Metcalf we might say. That I might add Congressman Metcalf had never lost to Jesse Owens but only in Olympic trials and Olympic Games and the meet immediately after the game he beat Jesse. But Jesse was very timely in. It could have been a psychological thing again because he had broken Jesse had broken three world records a year before and I had one in one afternoon so everything was a lie climaxed until the next big thing the Olympic Games. We don't know but we do know the facts.

Speaker 3 00:24:02.070
Well of course you really going through a form of black history and that's one of the purposes of the black athletes Hall of Fame but I'd like to turn the discussion to the question of support because something like this requires support. Maybe Charles you could tell us what kind of support you have right now or where are you located where you're located physically and what are some of your plans.

Speaker 10 00:24:22.740
Well we face are located on two 10 foot down on New York City main support comes from myself Herb Douglass and a couple of board members. And oh I forgot. And Bill Cosby who has been great pushed behind us 100 percent. What we plan on and we had a dinner back in March and 14th that made some money but haven't all the money had been zoom by administrative course and everything else. What we plan on doing is having a dinner in Las Vegas on March the 4th to the 7th in which we are featuring Bill Cosby is pushing out the guest Gibson at a tennis tournament.

Speaker 4 00:24:59.760
We have a black athlete Hall of Fame golf tournament the same time and the bank will be held that March 6 that evening in Las Vegas. We are so solicited from the public to donate money to the. How would anyone who wants to donate to the black athletes Hall of Fame do this. They can make out a cheque to the black athletes Hall of Fame which is a non-profit organization. To ten feet down on New York New York 1 0 1 0 0 0 I us the Black Hall of Fame to ten feet down in.

Speaker 19 00:25:28.950
New York New York 1 0 1 0.

Speaker 11 00:25:31.670
And now one of my folks who want to go to this big weekend and it sounds like more than a day it sounds like a weekend out in Las Vegas. Will there be announcements made.

Speaker 13 00:25:43.020
If anybody's interested I guess they could also write you at 2 10 Fifth Avenue and find out about it.

Speaker 10 00:25:48.290
That's that's correct. What we plan on do we know that people just can't get up money the way money is tight today and fly into Las Vegas. So we were we had a range with one of our airlines is had two planes one lead from Newark Airport when we leave from New York with a reasonable cause that way when there less than the cost to fly to Las Vegas from from a Tuesday to a Friday. So they can have that weekend what are the dates on that as March 4th.

Speaker 20 00:26:15.870
To March 7th 1975. Right. I see that sounds like a very interesting approach. What about some of your larger corporations many of the corporations involved in helping you to develop this maybe Herb you might want to speak to that. Yeah there are quite a few corporations that have I'll say. Made overtures that. State that they would assist us but there have been a few that have really become a part of and one.

Speaker 6 00:26:48.540
Union Carbide company they sponsor a luncheon whereby they gave the the black athlete Hall of Fame back.

Speaker 9 00:26:57.180
Black athletes Hall of Fame ring. And we had quite a setup. We had quite a luncheon at the Plaza Hotel and that was about from August 30th August 30th.

Speaker 6 00:27:10.350
And very successful. Even my company we have assisted in some manner.

Speaker 9 00:27:16.140
And Charlie perhaps you can elaborate on some come out the other.

Speaker 10 00:27:20.280
Scheffler is one it was our biggest contributor. I didn't have Colgate Palmolive Philip Myers company. You had Xerox of course. This company has you know started out when we are in the embryo stage and they helped us a great deal and they now come back with more support for us this year. And we have the Del Webb corporation and so I have a hotel which is going to put up a lot of money to help support us. And one where we hope to build a building is that we hope to sell bricks at ten dollars a brick to build this building.

Speaker 20 00:27:53.010
I see and I imagine your name would be on a brick wall or something that is indicative of your support. Well as we come to the close of the program we might remind the audience again that the thing that holds Jesse Owens Fritz Pollack Hank MacDonald Alice Coachman and Josh Gibson together is that they are members of the black athletes Hall of Fame. Is there anything in particular that you want to impress upon our audience just before we close her.

Speaker 6 00:28:18.930
Yes I would like for everyone to assist because you are a part of it. We're not out here by ourselves. We want everyone. OK. And you Charlie.

Speaker 10 00:28:28.210
Yes I liked them for the nominate anyone they think that is possibly in Hall of Fame that we overlooked and because without their help we don't exist at all.

Speaker 20 00:28:37.380
All right thanks to Charles Mays and Herb Douglas of the black athletes Hall of Fame for being our guest on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 21 00:28:43.350
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:57.970
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

