Speaker 1 00:00:01.590
The appointment of Atlanta attorney Griffin Bell as attorney general of the United States has caused much consternation in the black community here Haywood Burns Associate Professor of Law at New York University discussed this controversial appointment and its impact on legal issues facing the black community on tonight.

Speaker 2 00:00:20.460
Soul of reason this is soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 1 00:01:08.970
Our guest on tonight soul of reason is Haywood Burns who is associate professor of law at the New York University Law School and his former executive director of the National Conference of Black Lawyers. And we are really glad you could come and talk with us about the bell appointment and about other things facing the legal community. Thank you rascals very nice to be here.

Speaker 3 00:01:28.260
Well now that Griffin Bell has been affirmed by the Senate and he's in business despite the fact that NWA C ACP through its very eloquent spokesman Clarence Mitchell the National Council of Black Lawyers of which for which you spoke and many many other groups both black and white opposed attorney Bell's appointment that is in place. What is the reaction let's say today tonight of the black legal community. Is it hopeful is it watchful waiting. Is it one that says maybe we made a mistake. What's the situation.

Speaker 4 00:02:09.090
I think it can best be characterized as cautious. I believe that in general you would find in the black legal community great opposition to his confirmation but now that that is a fact and that he is the attorney general the United States people are taking a wait and see attitude. I think the most hopeful aspect of this this attitude rescue is that maybe in the fight that we waged against his confirmation certain lessons were learned and perhaps he will act differently as attorney general than he would have.

Speaker 5 00:02:40.950
But for the fight that was waged that's always a good reason particularly the democratic process to let your opposition be known and to make it very strong and very strident.

Speaker 3 00:02:52.440
I found some curious inconsistencies in the situation recognizing that Bell probably is a relatively skillful lawyer. I noticed that he derived those of you where he derived support from a variety of sources for example Vernon Jordan said he wasn't going to appoint him. Wade McCray who's been appointed this solicitor general said that he knew Bell and he differed with him on certain things. But he thought he was a capable person. There were some people who worked with him not worked with him necessarily but were involved in the litigation in Georgia around the schools and they came out and said well look if it hadn't been for Bell's firm hand the public schools of Georgia would've been closed by the racists there and what he did was a diversionary tactic rather than one that was actually aimed at circumventing the brown desegregation decision. Now what do you think about these arguments. I know that your organization the National Conference black lawyers opposed his nomination but what do you think about these arguments in general do they hold water. Are they substantive. What about it.

Speaker 6 00:04:04.200
I don't think they hold water. I think that the approach which says that Bell was a moderating influence has not been documented and I've been proven to this day. He's the attorney general now. But most people who make those statements I really have not proven their case. He was as we all know the chief of staff to Governor Vandermeer of Georgia at the time of massive massive resistance in that state. We know that he played a very important role as one of the key legal advisers in the drafting of legislation which was designed to keep black people out of the schools to if necessary close the schools. We know that if he performed a central function in the simply commission which was an especially appoint commission of the Georgia legislature in 1960 that was set up to make sure that maximum segregation continued. Now during the testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee the statement was repeatedly made by Bell and some of his supporters that he was a moderating influence and but for him it would have been a lot worse. I don't think they've proven that. What we do see what has been proven is that he was there at Vancouver's right hand when Vanderburgh was making very very late racist statements quoted widely in the press about what he was going to do we're not going to do with respect to integration in that state. And basically he was preaching the doctrine of apartheid at the time that his chief adviser was was Griffin Bell. And I think that if we followed Roscoe way there is a certain kind of pattern or trend that develops because even once Griffin Bell gets on the court of appeals the United States Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit he played the role of someone who I think can be characterized as an obstructionist. His decisions in his opinions were not reactionary to the extent that they refuse to take note of the fact that the Supreme Court the United States had made pronouncements in the area school desegregation anybody any judge that had done that in those days would have been seen as foolish because it was clear this is we're talking about years after Brown. But what he did do was through the craft of lawyer lawyerly art. It was a slow down desegregation. He took a gradualist approach so that those people who see him as a moderating influence I think are overlooking too many the facts and coming few forward with too few of their own facts to support that position. And one of the critical problems that you alluded to that I felt very strongly when I sat there in the Senate Judiciary Committee testifying in opposition to his nomination was the fact that there were a number of people including some black people who came to testify on his behalf. And I think that that is a very significant fact. Clarence Mitchell speaking for the NAACP. Parent Mitchell for the Congressional Black Caucus were asked about this and it is problematical. I think it's wrong for us to think that black people had to be monolithic but somehow you have to explain how it is that the head of the Atlanta branch of the NAACP would come forward in his behalf. The mayor of an Alabama city Prichard Alabama Jay Cooper would come forward and have you had to explain that and Clarence Mitchell's explanation if you if you know my little anecdote goes to the story of the elephant. Clarence Mitchell says that when you first captured elephant you can an elephant to a tree and the elephant will pull in Poland finally realize that he cannot pull up the tree because of the width of the trunk. And after that point you can chain elephant to little stake in the ground and the elephant will not pull or try to pull it out because he's changed in the mind. And it was a statement by Clarence Mitchell that these other black people who had come from oppressive conditions in the South were changing the mind that cause a lot of consternation at the hearing. And I think unfortunately took the focus off of Bell and put it on the differences between black people north and south. That was a very unfortunate development and very helpful I think in the overall confirmation fight.

Speaker 5 00:07:58.690
Of course confirmations are political. For example President Carter had to withdraw Ted Sorensen nomination as head of the CIA because of the fact he couldn't muster enough political support for it. So in that sense parading witnesses pro or con is a part of the process. The thing that I find curious is that some very noteworthy black people did support Judge Bell allegedly because they accept the story that he had been a moderating influence in a situation which was really fraught with danger etc.. They speak with some pride with their schools. Finally never got there. We never were closed. And then there are other people and I don't know whether Jake Cooper whom we know from New York. Yes very city. He's a student my and graduate from my law school and as a mayor of Prichard Alabama. There are some people really believe that we ought not to spend much time thinking about integration in schools and those who call it like it is. May let the blacks go to the predominately black neighborhood schools and white girl but only white neighbors schools are really dealing with reality. And with that reality black people might better develop their own schools and it may be that that is part of the logic that causes some people to take that position. All I'm reminded of Julian Bond's comment when he testified and several other people testified he testified against Bill several of the people testified in favor of Bell and he said it looks as though Potomac fever has replaced sickle cell anemia as black people's endemic disease.

Speaker 4 00:09:43.010
It's well I think that that's that's involved to at least possibly involve because quite apart from people who are our separation it's like Roy NSU probably like anything that Bell did to to keep a segregationist stance in the public schools. There are people who guess for pragmatic political reasons perhaps see that it's important that black people don't cut off all access to the next attorney general of the United States. But speaking as someone who's dealing with the issues on the merits speaking perhaps you might say as a moralist it was wrong. Griffin Bell took these positions. It was wrong that Griffin Bell took the position that he did with respect to belonging to the private clubs exclude blacks and Jews and not only was it wrong in belonging but the way in which he tried to explain it Roscoe I think was really a revelation as to how the man viewed the world. He explained it first by saying well if you if you were in Atlanta you'd want to belong to these clubs too. Forgetting for a moment that you had to be white or gentile to belong. And then he moved to the considerations I put 10000 hours do that and now how can you expect me to withdraw. And finally he says I'm not going to be in Washington forever maybe I should just say it's been my membership not resign. So I think that the whole character of the man was revealed not just from the fact they belong to these clubs but the way in which he tried to explain and rationalize.

Speaker 7 00:10:59.380
Well now that he's in there I'm going to be certain legal issues which affect national legal issues including busing and segregation and capital punishment the right of protection after having been apprehended. Things of this type that will certainly come under the purview of the Justice Department and Griffin Bell including the FBI. Who is going to here the FBI. One of the things that tends to diffuse the situation a little is that the people's lawyer in a sense the solicitor general of the United States which is a position I believe Thurgood Marshall once held. It is yes is going to be a black person. Judge Wade McCrae from Detroit Michigan. How will this the legal complex operate in terms of black people do you feel that Bell himself will have a decided imprint on the way in which Justice Department operates or do you feel that the momentum of the system the fact that the antitrust situation is up for review and trust are being evaluated the fact that busing is obviously a political question how is it going to operate. How do you feel this is going to affect those issues that relate to the black community.

Speaker 8 00:12:26.530
Well I think that he will have a desired effect. Clearly anyone coming into government is faced with a task of overcoming a certain momentum that is already in operation but a person coming in with the backing that he has and with the closeness that he has to the present is obviously going to begin to play his own tune and things will have to begin to vibrate in sympathy to that tune. I'm not sure exactly what that tune is going to be. We're going to have to watch very closely. I am encouraged although I was vigorously opposed to his nomination and I felt that there were there are many people much more qualified. I am somewhat encouraged because the sense that I have now is that this whole experience for him was an educational one was one in which he he learned just the pragmatic for the situation if if not out of out of the goodness of his heart or out of actual wisdom he's just going to have to treat black people differently and better than I think he would have. But for the confirmation hearing. So I think there will be a difference. I am cautious and skeptical about the appointment of Wade McCray not because of any doubts that I have about Judge McCray. He is an excellent jurist and as far as I know a fine human being. What I'm concerned about is an administrative problem and that is in conversations with the National Bar Association. Prior to his confirmation Judge Bell apparently made statements that he was thinking about a certain amount of reorganization within the Justice Department. And what I am concerned might happen is that the new attorney general might reorganize the tasks such that blacks may be given the semblance of power without a substance you can name a black person as the assistant attorney general in charge of civil rights but so different redefine the function that is really not a very powerful position in same can be done with both the deputy attorney general and the solicitor general spots both of which have been mentioned as possibilities for blacks. One example of that is that traditionally in this country the solicitor general has been the advocate of the people and the lawyer for the Justice Department. He's the one that argued the cases where Bell is apparently told some people privately that for the first time in my knowledge anyway certainly in modern times and he Bell the attorney general was going to start arguing cases which right away cuts into the power of the power the bailiwick of Wade McCray. So I'm going to watch very very closely I think the black legal community is going to watch very closely I know National Conference of Black Lawyers will continue to monitor this situation because we do not think that Carter followed his model of why not the best when he picked Griffin Bell tonight on sole reason we were talking with Professor Haywood Burns of New York University School of Law.

Speaker 7 00:15:05.980
Thus far we've been talking about the Griffin Bell appointment but there are some other issues that affect the black people legally and because of your activity national conflict black lawyers I know that you're very much involved with those. Recently we had sort of a sideshow in Utah around the execution of Gary Gilmore the first capital punishment in some 10 years I believe it was nine years do you think that the Gilmore execution will in fact accelerate the twin toward more capital punishment.

Speaker 8 00:15:48.200
I think it certainly will have that effect psychologically and practically. There really is no legal significance with regard to hastening additional executions. It won't make it come any faster and slower from the point of view of the legal implications of what occurred but just psychologically and pragmatically. When you've broken a moratorium almost 10 years you're going to I think find it easier to begin to execute people in other states. And we have hundreds literally hundreds of people on death row. Men and women we had at the time the Supreme Court decision upholding capital punishment almost almost two thirds of the people on death row been non-white people black Chicano Native American Indian and those are the people who are now very much because of the breaking of the moratorium in jeopardy in the shadow of the gallows. The firing squad.

Speaker 9 00:16:43.040
The electric chair the gas chamber because it seems like a kind of double jeopardy do you convict people under one set of laws and you keep them on death row wondering what's going to happen for ten years. Then the courts say we need to set up some standards for establishing this penalty of death and then they go back and review these cases that yes they met the standards retroactively. Now of course that really isn't very fair because there's a climate as you point up. The mere fact that one person somewhere in this country has been executed establishes a climate within which others can be condemned to death and as almost every brief and every study of this has shown that black citizens Charles Chicano citizens poor citizens are given the death penalty for approximately the same crime far more frequently than people from the more affluent part of society. That's clearly. So we have we have we have both a sociological economic issue in terms of the unequal way in which this affects black people and poor people. We also have the so-called moral issue. There are some people who really truly do believe that the best way to deter or not deter at least punish crime is to take someone's lives. There are people on the other hand who recognize that the statistics generally show that the death penalty really is not a significant deterrent to anything.

Speaker 8 00:18:13.010
Yeah there is no documentation which is totally persuasive on this point that people who argue deterrence have never been able to make a case that couldn't be refuted. You cannot really base this on any empirical study or data that is that Turner is not. But leaving the question aside as I think we have to because it has not been disposed of any authoritative way. But even if it were I think that you say there's a moral question involved here there's certain ethical questions involved here about the right of the state to take a life. How can we dare call ourselves a civilized society when we're involved in this kind of murder by the state. But beyond that beyond the moral question beyond the ethical question of the state taking a life even if you want to accept the possibility of that or the correctness of that how can you justify it as you as you indicate Roscoe against the backdrop of the kind of class and caste bias that there is in our justice system. Because what you're talking about I said two thirds of the people on death row approximately at the time of that decision were non-white close to 100 percent if not 100 percent were poor. Clinton Duffy the warden at San Quentin ex warden at San Quentin he never knew a person of means to be executed in this country. And so with a flawed justice system and we're never gonna have a perfect one with such a flawed justice system we can't have a confidence at the far end of it having had discrimination at every point along the why having had discretion at every point along the line at the far end end of it to decide that.

Speaker 9 00:19:41.540
Well yes we'll take this person's life but maybe there's something else that's involved in this. Most of the crimes for which the death penalty is given are crimes against people are homicides or certain types of kidnappings certain Sprewell spying probably the Rosenberg case which is one of the blots at least in my opinion on American justice is one where people of some means were executed but they were executed on a purely political witch hunt in a sense.

Speaker 8 00:20:14.330
But anyone on death row today certainly is not there for having taken a life that.

Speaker 9 00:20:17.700
That's certainly true. Their whole range of offenses does this suggest that maybe the power people the people who have the economic resources in society really do want to punish these poor people these lower status people for having done something to them. For example is any data to show that the death penalty is given more frequently when a black person kills another black person of the same economic status as against killing a white person or a black person of higher socioeconomic status.

Speaker 8 00:20:55.360
The most recent studies that I'm familiar with her work done at the University of Pennsylvania and published in the Temple Law Review by a professor by the name of Mark Rideout which shows that you're much more likely to get a capital sentence in a situation where the crime is one of black perpetrator white victim so that it is the white life that is valued more highly in fact the whole existence of the death penalty in this country I think is an example of just how little this country values non-white life.

Speaker 1 00:21:28.630
Well both as to the victim and the perpetrator what is the next step now in terms of this fight against capital punishment.

Speaker 8 00:21:34.240
While the fight continues on Moscow I don't believe even though we suffered a major setback when the court upheld the death penalty in the great versus Georgia case back in July of 76. I don't believe we've exhausted all legal arguments. There are many legal arguments I think that still can be advanced. However we're being reduced more and more to an ad hoc case by case fight rather than the broad general issues because on constitutional grounds the court upheld certain kinds of guided discretion statutes which allows for the death penalty to be imposed. But what what's opened legally is that the court in that case said that these standards on their face on their face are constitutional. I think the question remains for four legal battle whether or not in their application they are fair they are legal they are constitutional so that we're going to probably take it to that level.

Speaker 3 00:22:28.900
The question of the application of the standards that the court has approved on their face more and more black young people are going into the legal profession. As I read the other day that more and more people are going the legal profession and are going to have a lot of unemployed lawyers. But beyond that many of the young black male and female would want the legal profession have gone into it because they see this as a way of challenging the system as a way of making the system fairer. This is a way of helping their people. To what extent is this really true. Once they get out of law school behind of areas are blacks entering when they go to practice. And what impact if any are they having on the whole system of justice in our society.

Speaker 4 00:23:15.760
I think they're having a considerable and significant impact but it's it's a fairly complicated impact the influx of black law students over the last 10 years has been tremendous. In fact the black bar in this country represented say five years ago represent less than 2 percent of the overall bar and then the last five to 10 years we've had as many black law students come into law school as there were black lawyers in the country say in nineteen sixty five. So that the number of black lawyers in this country should be doubling in that 10 year period which is very significant it means a lot of things. For one thing it means that you're black bar is gonna be very different from your stereotype of a lawyer. The stereotype of a lawyer in this country is is that he's usually or elderly he's usually white usually male. We have the majority black lawyers in this country very shortly. Keep people 28 years old or younger which is a very significant fact because black people in general have been excluded from profession over the decades and this new influx means that we're going to have a very young black bar. But the problem of course is where are they gonna be working. What are they going to be doing. Are they in fact going to be solving or helping to solve some of the problems of their community. I believe that a significant number are able to maintain the commitment through law school and to go directly into service related legal areas. But a large number of people now and I think increasingly so in recent times than say five years ago think that they want to go into traditional areas of practice. By that I mean the large Wall Street firms business commerce industry which might in the end be all to the good. Even though it's not directly related to civil rights if they remember where they came from Rosco if they remember why they're there. One of the things that concerns me is both the fact that law schools are cutting back on the admissions of black male students. That trend is going beginning to go the other way that we're beginning to fall off and black admissions and the number of people who are graduating and who are not going into fields where they continue to make some contribution to the good of the black community and more there's a public service phrase called pro bono publicly which means for the public good. And I always have a phrase pro bono public or Negro for the black public good and it's just in recent years I'm beginning to have some questions about our law graduates who are going off to Wall Street and perhaps forgetting what they came to Moscow for in the first place.

Speaker 3 00:25:52.180
Well that as you say is complicated because I understand that a goodly number of law graduates when the larger community do not actually end up practicing law. I know I met several young black lawyers have gone into business related to let's say to entertainment or to some particular kind of product and where they have the law background they don't actually end up practicing law. One area that I thought might be one where the black lawyers might have an impact and that is in lawyers to various public agencies public service commissions Communications Commissions trade commissions et cetera because that is one area that has an effect if you make a decision far beyond the one to one relationship with too many people.

Speaker 1 00:26:42.130
The stereotype of the lawyer is Perry Mason All right arguing before a jury and as you well know this is really a minuscule part of the average lawyers were very smart.

Speaker 4 00:26:54.500
No I think you're absolutely right that we do need to find ways where we can have a spreading effect the whole approach of law reform through going to the Supreme Court and getting a new precedent to filter down and have broad impact that is becoming less and less possible given the nature of the present Supreme Court so that we're not going to get too much law reform through the test case method. I think you really can get a spreading effect as you indicated through having people go in through the administrative agencies having people go throughout the structure and superstructure of the legal profession as long as they are performing in a way that is consistent with the high ideals and goals that they originally pronounced. I don't think the problem right now is one of having too many lawyers certainly not having too many black lawyers. The problem is one of redefining what they do areas of their need and that is something that we're going to have for a long time need.

Speaker 1 00:27:46.930
What does a professor are you doing to help this redefinition.

Speaker 6 00:27:51.160
Well I'm calling on people's radio programs and talking about it for one. I'm also in the law school currently engaged in counseling students and trying to help them both with their curriculum while they're there and also in finding employment once they graduate because there is a need for much employment assistance for the young black lawyer other young lawyer in this community.

Speaker 1 00:28:12.820
And of course one thing that you haven't said and that is that you serve as a very prominent and important role model was that really is the way in which young people learn. Our guest on tonight so the reason has been Haywood Burns is Associate Professor of Law at New York University School of Law and former executive director of the National Conference of Black Lawyers. We've been discussing the Griffin Bell appointment and also the challenges that remain for blacks in the legal profession. Glad that you've been able to be with us tonight. Haywood thank you so much Roscoe. Nice being here.

Speaker 10 00:28:42.700
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:57.290
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

