Speaker 1 00:00:01.410
1975 has been declared the International Women's Year. Recently in Mexico City and an international gathering of women throughout the world black women challenged some of the objectives of the women's movement here Martha Jones of the Women's Action Alliance and Diane Lacey Special Assistant to the president of the Health and Hospitals Corporation in New York City discussed the role of black women in the women's movement. On Tonight soul of reason. This is Soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box.

Speaker 2 00:00:54.510
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 3 00:01:15.030
Our guest on the right sole reason Martha Jones of the Women's Action Alliance and Diane Lacey is a special assistant to date. John Holliman who is the president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation. Glad to have you both with us this evening. Glad to be here. Martha possibly you might begin by talking about the Women's Action Alliance. I know that your job as a public relations director for this is a relatively new organization and is concerned with the women's movement and possibly you could cue us in terms of how the Action Alliance relates to the International Women's Year and how it also relates to the National Women's Agenda developed by women black women from America.

Speaker 4 00:01:57.930
All right fine. The Women's Action Alliance is relatively new if you want to say that but it has been existence for four years and basically it is a resource organization that provides resource information. It provides model projects that can be duplicated all over the country. It provides names of experts in various areas such as employment housing health daycare but women who want to set up institutions to help them you know better their lives in any of those areas. And black women I think can use those services as well as they can use you know services provided by the government such as welfare programs and the source is a source that is the national source. I mean if you're in California and you want to start a daycare center you can call the Women's Action Alliance and get some information on centers in California who you know started some kind of service that you can you can go to them for information or we can send packets of information on for instance we have a packet called How to develop a child daycare center and you can cough information like that or basically the alliance is a consortium of groups that provides information or is that a political action body. Well it's actually no it's not a political action body. In fact we are a nonprofit organization and we have a tax exemption status which means we cannot do political activities but we can give information you know on how to participate in the political process for instance but we cannot you know actually engage in political activity is basically is a resource referral organization and we are a non membership organization so there are no members of the organization however in response to the president's mandate that Americans you know bound together to you know knock down the barriers you know that that that eliminate the full participation of women in American life. In response to that mandate that the director of the Women's Action Alliance Ruth Abrams sent out an invitation to women from all kinds of organization from the most traditional to the to the you know the radical feminist from two rich women to poor women to all women to young women and at this monster that was overwhelming and these women came together to create what is called the U.S. national women's agenda the first of its kind. And that agenda was presented in Mexico City. And in fact today the Ruth is presenting that agenda to the president's commission we hope that will be adopted and from there we're going to present it to mayors and governors and and even to the president February.

Speaker 3 00:04:52.320
Now Diane you are affiliated with a group known as the National Black Feminist Organization.

Speaker 5 00:04:59.010
That's right. Dr. Brown. And I'd like to give you a very good example of how the Women's Action Alliance serves as a resource in the forming stages of the organization back in 1972. The Women's Action Alliance provided office space telephones equipment and other things that a fledgling organization needs to get started. Our organization now is some thousands of women across the country. We have 14 chapters in major cities and we owe a great deal of things to the Women's Action Alliance for those for those early resources and we maintain a continuing relationship with them.

Speaker 6 00:05:40.830
Now in Mexico City apparently a lot of things happen. And I heard about it in the press and I heard some of the delegates when I came back talked about it and I gather that a goodly number of black women were disturbed by some of the things that happened there. And I also know that another organization core challenge the United States delegation were not being adequately representative of black women. Diane what role did your organization have in the IWM y meeting and what were they attitudes even you may not have had a direct role in it toward some of the things that are happening there. This in a sense is a way of opening up that schism that frequently exists between black women and white women in the women's movement.

Speaker 7 00:06:26.720
Just as in any area of society this isn't between blacks and whites because of the racism that exists in society. So could you give us some impressions you have about Mexico City. I w y etc..

Speaker 8 00:06:40.760
That's a very large opening. You've just given me I don't have the full report either of what happened in Mexico City and maybe Martha can help us with it we were able to send only one representative to that conference. I think our first alarm was when we discovered that the delegation that was really representing the United States was headed by a male a white male that was a number one booboo. Why did the how why do you think that happened. I'm not sure of why that happened but I know that it set the tone that alarmed and disturbed a lot of women. I hope we're not going to focus too much on the skids I'm between black women and white women. The National Black Feminist association formed largely from women who had been active in the so-called white women's movement but felt that they were would be more able to focus on the specific problems in the black community within their own organization. It doesn't mean that they are not still. Many of them active in that movement but it means that it's a lot easier to focus on your own priorities within your own group.

Speaker 6 00:07:52.750
All right specifically what would be the priorities and what are the priorities of black women that might differ a little from the priorities as white women. But mainly what are the priorities of your organization. I'll talk with Martha about the larger priorities of the National Women's Agenda.

Speaker 5 00:08:08.960
Well we're concerned with of course the definition of a black feminist as a woman who is committed to the elimination of discrimination based on both sex and race. So we're concerned with discrimination against black people and concerned likewise with discrimination against women so that we are concerned about discrimination in housing. We look particularly at the growing numbers in our community families headed by women. And as you know up until quite recently women who were single parent families had a great deal of trouble getting into public housing. And so we've been concerned about that and the elimination of discrimination in housing child care of course I think cuts across the women's movement. We're concerned about quality child care. When we look at education while the national agenda speaks to a number of aspects of education our first concern is quality education for all children we want the school system to begin to teach all black children that has got to be our first concern. And then of course there are other issues that are listed in the national agenda that we're concerned about we want to see continuing education most of our women are working women and women who must care for families and so they're not able to get those degrees that are very needed in our society in order to qualify for them to be qualified even when you look at affirmative action programs.

Speaker 8 00:09:49.880
Our women are not even qualify liable because we've not had access to some of these kinds of programs. So we would look at each program area and look at it both in terms of the black community as a whole and in terms of the black woman.

Speaker 6 00:10:06.050
Now Martha in terms of the Women's Action Alliance what kind of response have you been getting from the various women group groups to the national agenda. Is there any one particular thing that rises to the fore. I know that this is the year of VRA the Equal Rights Amendment. I don't know the extent of which this becomes a major agenda for the Women's Action Alliance but I do know that some of the women's groups have spent a great deal of their energies dealing with securing passage ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment. What are the priorities that the national agenda the national organizations are really putting on top shelf.

Speaker 9 00:10:50.720
I think we we have a list of 11 and they are fair representation and participation in political process. I think that all black women can. Most black women can identify with that whether they be feminists. I hesitate to use the word feminist because I think one of the things that the alliance is trying to do is is trying to incorporate all women you know regardless of you know whether they can find a way for Yes very interesting.

Speaker 10 00:11:14.450
How would you define a feminist.

Speaker 9 00:11:15.950
Well that's one of the reasons I said I would hate. How do you define language like a female I guess. And I don't know.

Speaker 10 00:11:22.460
How would you define me. I define a feminist as someone who believes in the equality of women. Well what about a man who believes in equality of women. I would describe him as a feminist. Oh right. Because I do believe that that's a very interesting point. All right now go ahead.

Speaker 9 00:11:37.790
LAUGHING And Diane's concern of education. We have a priority item which is labeled Equal Education and Training meaningful work and adequate compensation. And that goes for you know household workers.

Speaker 6 00:11:50.730
You know some of it was covered in ERISA theoretically VRA were passed. You eliminate discrimination education in jobs and promotion et cetera. So in a sense your agenda cuts across some of the things that are involved in the Equal Rights Amendment. For example suppose equal like the amendment passed tomorrow would you need this agenda that you're talking about here.

Speaker 8 00:12:17.240
I think you would. One item just specifically you may know Dr. Brown that in the Albany legislature this term very progressive bill which would have provided benefits for household workers and more adequate compensation and a minimum wage was defeated. I think this is a specific that would not have emerged through the provisions under the Equal Rights Amendment. By the way how is the IRS doing in New York State. Well it goes to. It will be presented to the voters in November. And you know that there's very little money around for anything and even less money for the kind of campaign that needs to be waged to bring the issues to all women.

Speaker 6 00:13:02.060
I believe in New York State. It has to be passed by the electorate as a referendum and then it has to go back to the legislature again. Is that the way it works.

Speaker 5 00:13:11.600
Yes it has to be passed by the legislature twice it's passed this term in Albany and we'll come to the voters in November and then go back.

Speaker 7 00:13:19.550
Now if the voters don't support it it won't go back to the ledge. That's correct. So therefore you are unless the process is started once again you are a really has a hard way to go. That's right. And we know we have your support and you have the support of sole reason and the air.

Speaker 6 00:13:34.640
But again this is an issue that people are talking about and sometimes at least it's my observation that the support for equal rights amendment gets confused with some of the specific things on the agenda. Has that been your experience. People believed we would everything is that one thing on the agenda and they say as a result I'm not in favor of equal rights.

Speaker 11 00:13:54.860
Also there's been a lot of bad press about it. A lot of press that suggested that women are going to have to use the women's bathroom facilities are going to be integrated that certain privacy and protections that are now available to women will be removed.

Speaker 8 00:14:12.140
They're frightened at the thought of being drafted into the army and so forth. There's a lot of bad press and when in fact there will be many more benefits than there will be penalty.

Speaker 12 00:14:25.250
I think that's a good example of how the black feminist and the Women's Action Alliance need to work together our guest on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 1 00:14:33.440
Martha Jones of the Women's Action Alliance and Diane Lacey who is special assistant to the president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.

Speaker 6 00:14:41.980
We're talking about the women's movement and how it relates to black women and very specifically Diane we were talking about the future of the Equal Rights Amendment. If you were to make the prognosis for New York state what do you think will happen in November.

Speaker 8 00:14:59.450
Well I believe that the Equal Rights Amendment will pass and I believe the electorate will support it. I do believe that we're going to have to do major campaigning over the next two or three months to persuade all communities that as I said have gotten very bad press on this. That there are many benefits for women. We're talking about really equal access to jobs. We're talking about even when we talk about the opportunities for the draft we know that we have a volunteer army. At the moment and we're talking about training opportunities and high paying jobs in the army that now women are not able to get. So there are advantages for women and particularly for black women that will come about if this amendment is passed.

Speaker 3 00:15:57.330
Now Martha in your capacity as public relations director of Women's Action Alliance I'm sure you had an opportunity to observe changing attitudes toward women.

Speaker 6 00:16:07.100
Do you feel that attitudes are changing rapidly enough or significantly in terms of the sexism in existence society the International Women's Year For example supposed to highlight throughout the world the needs of women and we had Angela King for the United Nations was working on that program with us some weeks ago and she pointed up that in certain communities throughout the world women have absolutely no rights at all. They can't hold property they can't vote they can't do a number of things women can do in the so-called developed parts of the world.

Speaker 12 00:16:45.950
So the question I'm really asking you Martha is to what extent do you feel that the various efforts that were catalyzed by some of the women activists in the late 60s are now bearing fruit in terms of a more positive attitude on the part of the population at large to women's rights.

Speaker 9 00:17:08.930.0000000001164
I think the women's movement today is is drastically different than it was say four or five years ago. I think the Women's Action Alliance has done a piece called the Women's Movement today which brings that which puts the women's move into perspective. It talks about the trends it talked about the growth of groups it talks about the geographical trends as well as international trends. And I think that you know when the movement first became popular I noticed of whatever black women weren't so involved because I think some of the questions that were raised by the group were some of the problems you know being tackled by the women's group did not relate to specifically to black women. And I think now that the kinds of things that the women's movement is talking about have you know they're very you know directly on the problems of black women probably more so than white women.

Speaker 12 00:18:07.640
You know some of the initial reaction was that the women's movement as a white middle class movement was concerned with getting women an opportunity to do exactly the same thing the white middle class men do where some of the things that you and Diane have been talking about emphasis on day care emphasis on equal access to public housing jobs and so on tend to be more grassroots type of issues on which you can probably get a broader base but you still get that stereotype that the women's movement means that men are going to have to waste the dinner dishes and women will no longer do it. How do you deal with that. I'm sure that you've heard that both in social conversation even professionally. How do you deal with those type of stereotypes about what this new freedom of women is going to do to the privileges of men. Well if I can just jump in on that.

Speaker 8 00:19:00.980
In every movement there are both there are advances and there are some sacrifices that have to be made. And particularly if you look at the present economy it does require in two parent families that both persons work and we we know from the research is done by the women's movement and from other social movements that more involvement by both parents with children is preferable in the development of these children healthy development of children so that these things have to be looked at as tasks that people share and can enjoy as opposed to penalties.

Speaker 10 00:19:44.900
Well what you're really saying is that yes it does mean that some men will have to wash dishes when it didn't wash in before. Not that that is the most important thing in the world.

Speaker 12 00:19:53.930
But I use that as an example to develop the reasons for some of the hostility that you find from some of the less enlightened segments of the male population. And I guess Martha first I'm asking what is the Action Alliance doing if anything to deal with some of these stereotypic reflex responses that reflect hostility toward improve conditions of women.

Speaker 9 00:20:25.170
I think one of the things that the Women's Action lines has found in his dealing with national women's groups across the country is that the question of family style is one of the areas in which women really get bogged down and no progress is made one way or the other. And they have you know diverted their attention from that to more profitable areas which are the areas that included in the U.S. women's agenda. And I think one of the ways that that suggests the involvement now of black women in the movement is is to take a look at the some of the board members you know the alliance and some of those members are Eleanor Holmes Norton is a member Shirley Chisholm is a member Carolyn Reed who is the director of the household workers something I don't remember exactly her organization raising Technicians Association. Right. Right. Thank you Diane. And we even have a man Franklin Thomas who's the president of the Bedford Stuyvesant Corporation in on our board. Yvonne Braithwaite Burke is a member and these women are active participating members in the organizations and of course you know make sure that black women's needs problems interests are taken care of.

Speaker 8 00:21:38.700
And Roscoe we we've all been I think we as black women and black men have been critical of each other and the way we have performed in society. But our our goal our overall goal is the improvement of our condition and the improvement of our community and what the National Black Feminist Organization tries to do in coalition with other groups is to develop an arena and a forum for dialogue on these issues and problems because as I said our goal is one and that is the improvement of the quality of life in our community for black women.

Speaker 12 00:22:15.260
The problem is really exacerbating the double problem.

Speaker 13 00:22:19.530
And I know that in some affirmative action programs there's been a lot of friction between black men and black women because some organizations try to kill two birds with one stone by hiring both a woman and a black. Does your organization have any position on affirmative action in that regard.

Speaker 8 00:22:39.990
Well we recognize that that is illegal and that is an incorrect way to apply the law.

Speaker 10 00:22:45.420
And so that isn't really illegal. Or is it an opinion that some people have given that's one of the things that I wonder about as many times you hear it even today people were saying Well look I can hire a woman and a black woman and kill two birds with one stone.

Speaker 5 00:23:03.210
Well we I don't believe it's been challenged or it's been demonstrated through the courts so I can't say that but we tried to urge our members and try to inform our members that this practice is not in the spirit does not represent the spirit of the law.

Speaker 6 00:23:19.740
We don't want to be a party to that and we want to expose that when it occurs because I know at one time in the black movement there was a tendency particularly in organizations to say well look we want a black male as the leader because in our society black male happens black males have been so frequent pushed behind and white power structure has found it more easy to relate to black women leaders. And I know that in certain organizations that I'm familiar with.

Speaker 10 00:23:49.140
There was an overt move to push black male leadership and that continues to be so.

Speaker 8 00:23:54.360
I think though if you look at the statistics you find that at the bottom of the economic ladder the bottom of the employment ladder are black women. Black men get higher incomes and have more of this nation's jobs than do black women. So that's a myth that's been perpetuated.

Speaker 3 00:24:14.470
I wasn't referring so much to the economics to was really referring to leadership positions. Frequently I have heard it said and even by some white executives they'd rather deal with a black woman than they would with a black male.

Speaker 7 00:24:27.660
The way it comes down is that they're not as angry. They are easier nicer to deal with. Now that doesn't necessarily mean that they're selling anybody down the river but it does have to do with the perceptions I think of the White Society of Black male leadership.

Speaker 5 00:24:42.680
I think it's both true and not true on the one hand women have learned or have developed and it's more of an adaptive style in order to survive because the protections have not been available to them and they have not been really oriented or socialized to be as aggressive as men have been in the past.

Speaker 11 00:25:03.990
But on the other hand when you talk about executive positions the sexism that prevails in this society I believe exists and a white white male executive prefers to deal with another male let's say it's a club it's a society it's a fraternity that is much more comfort bow to him even though there are barriers along race or cultural lines.

Speaker 12 00:25:30.440
I think you're probably right. Particularly in the corporate suites I'm really referring to political action type type of movements. For example Martha in the activities of the Women's Action Alliance. Is there a strong political arm but led by women fighting actively on the political front to improve the conditions of women.

Speaker 9 00:25:53.750
As I said before the alliance itself is a resource organization. We do give technical assistance say in an area fundraising of what would happen if say a black organization or black individual who is interested in starting up something on the political process would call it what would happen is we would we would find out of course that their geographical location and put them in touch with organizations in you know close to them so they could you know have some sort of meetings or exchange of information and assistance from that group. We ourselves don't get involved in political activity we do refer organizations or individuals to groups who are involved in political activity.

Speaker 13 00:26:35.210
Now how would an organization or individual who desires to get in touch with the Women's Action Alliance do so. What is your address and where's your phone.

Speaker 9 00:26:43.160
We're located a 370 Lexington Avenue and the telephone number is 6 8 5 0 800 and they would call and ask for the kind of information they wished and they would get referred to somebody who would help them immediately.

Speaker 6 00:26:57.800
Basically your organization forms performs a catalytic role and information dissemination role rather than the activist role per say exactly. And in the case of your organization Diane the National Black Feminist Organization. How do you operate.

Speaker 5 00:27:14.810
Well our function is more of an activist organization we're interested in programs who are interested in consciousness raising that is I shouldn't use the word consciousness raising because that's us become so stereotyped and maligned. But just raising our level of information about ourselves and the possibilities out here for us to have better personal development and also in terms of community issues and projects.

Speaker 6 00:27:44.990
Very briefly could you tell us some of the folks who are involved in the National Black Women's feminist organization.

Speaker 5 00:27:50.600
You mean names like Eleanor Holmes Norton some of the same names that have been mentioned Carolyn Reid from the household Technicians Association but it's largely a rank and file organization it cuts across welfare workers professionals students and so forth.

Speaker 3 00:28:07.760
I certainly can see and I'm sure I already can see that there is a great commonality in the women's movement and in the black women's movement.

Speaker 12 00:28:15.230
And I'd like to thank you both. Martha Jones of the Women's Action Alliance and Diane Lacey Special Assistant to the president of New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation for being with us to discuss the women's movement particularly in International Women's Year. Thank you.

Speaker 14 00:28:30.230
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:44.720
Soul of reason is produced by the WNBA public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

