Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.220
The future of New York City's 18 municipal hospitals is threatened by New York City's fiscal crisis. Hear Patricia Looses Rainford, Associate Director of the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, discuss this important issue on tonight's, "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:36.740
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of Black thought. "Soul of Reason," is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:03.710
With us this evening is Mrs. Patricia Looses Rainford, who's Associate Director of the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center. And we'll be talking about the effects of New York City's fiscal crisis on the New York City municipal hospital system. And, Pat, as we begin, possibly you could tell our audience about the system as it is now comprised, what is the system that is threatened, the system that we're trying to save? How many hospitals? How does it operate? Who does it serve?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:01:33.070
18 hospitals. And how it operates at this point is a very good question. I'm going to try and answer you without snideness, if I can. Two years ago, by state legislation, the New York City Department of Hospitals was abolished as such, and the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation came into being. This was done to help take some of the politics out of the health services system in the hospitals in New York. I might say I don't think it's worked very well because the Board of Directors are all political appointees of the Mayor, some from the City Council, but still they have to be cleared through the Mayor.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:13.310
I think one notable thing is that Dr. John Holliman, who's a well-known black physician, is the president of the corporation. And Dr. Holliman or Mike, as we call him, has been on the show to talk about some of the things that he's tried to do in his administration. And he's pointed up the massive amount of red tape and problems that he has in getting the moneys to the hospitals to serve the people. So in a sense, you're suggesting that this Health and Hospitals Corporation idea hasn't worked out as well as it should? Or are you suggesting that it's a good idea, but there hasn't been adequate support for it?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:02:49.610
I'm suggesting that it's a marvelous idea and it would have worked out and it isn't-- there isn't that much red tape anymore. And Mike is a fantastic man, very good doctor. And I don't agree with those people who say he's not a good administrator. He's trying his best to administrate, but he can't with his hands tied behind him by the board. He hasn't had a chance to administer the hospital system because ever since he became the President of the Corporation, he's been faced with the budget cuts and the battle to keep us alive.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:21.980
Now, what is that battle? You say the budget cuts in the battle keep us alive. The upcoming, or the contemporary fiscal crisis has brought about some pressure for some cuts, but I gather that this has been going along for the past couple of years, that they've been nibbling away at the budget of the Health and Hospitals Corporation. And what's the reason for this?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:03:42.200
There are a couple of reasons. First of all, when the Corporation came into being, it was part of the legislation that the hospital-- The Hospital Corporation was supposed to receive X amount of dollars from the City in tax levy moneys. It required the City to include in its expense budget a minimum appropriation of tax levy for the services provided. The City has never given us this minimum amount. And therefore, the Cooperation is, uh, has two lawsuits against the City right now. You never read about that in the newspaper. They keep it very quiet.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:14.871
When you say The Corporation, how can the City sue itself?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:04:17.481
The Corporation is a quasi independent corporation and is suing the City for the tax levy funds that it needs to operate.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:24.950
But that's sort of a circle. You say that the people on the Board are appointed by the Mayor and they exercise some control. So, uh. ..

Patricia Looses Brown 00:04:31.492
They can't turn their back on the fact that the City has not given us the money. And it's not the Board, it's the Corporation lawyers who are suing. I don't think they're too happy about it themselves or else they talk about it sometime.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:46.331
When you say the talk about something [unintelligable]

Patricia Looses Brown 00:04:47.961
They never bring it up at the Board.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:50.011
[unintelligable] the public or to the board.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:04:51.321
It's been brought to the attention of the public because it's been, it's been told over and over again to the many reporters who, who pick us apart and ask questions. And they never present in the newspapers exactly the way it is.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:04.970
I see.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:05:05.523
The other half of the problem is, [cross talk] can I finish it?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:08.470
I wanna follow this. Why is it that the city didn't provide this tax levy money?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:05:12.651
That's a good question.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:14.122
It means that they didn't have it? Or they really thought that the State was going to pick up the difference?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:05:19.191
Whether they had it or not, the problem is they should have given it to us. And what they've done, you know, with our third party payments, they skim it off the top. We don't get the money back. If the hospital provides you with with health services, right? And you pay the hospital, we don't get the money. It goes a nice long route through the City and they skim off what they want. We don't get back what we put out and we don't get the tax levy funds that we need to run the hospitals. And then they say we can't run the hospitals, and Holleman is not a good administrator, and the hospital system is not good. And it's grossly unfair. The other problem is Dr. Belan, who is the Chairman of the Board, and he was the City's Chief Health Officer. He's the Acting Administrator of the Health Services Administration. And it's very strange to me and to a number of other people in a number of community groups now who are calling for the Mayor to remove him from his position with the Corporation, that he is anti- the hospital system. He would like to see it turned over to the voluntaries, which makes no sense at all. Another argument that people never bring out is that Medicaid pays us less than it pays the voluntaries to provide service to Medicaid patients. And if they took if they closed the municipal hospital system down and turned it over to the voluntaries, they'd be paying more money in the long run.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:39.630
Well, of course, this idea of having free hospital service for the population of New York City...

Patricia Looses Brown 00:06:46.890
It's not free.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:46.893
.. . has raised a lot of questions, though. It's alleged that New York City is the only large city, or only city in the country that has more than one public hospital. And it's suggested that quite possibly these services might be provided more economically, not so much just directly in terms of patient costs, but also in terms of this massive administrative superstructure that exists to run these hospitals. How do people in the hospital system like yourselves respond to this particular comment or suggestion?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:07:20.490
Two answers. First of all, if you look at the county of Los Angeles, that's they say Los Angeles only has one hospital. Well, it's a county hospital and it's not Los Angeles City Hospital. If you've ever seen Los Angeles County Hospital, it's tremendous. And probably it adds up to the same 18 hospitals that we have there all over the county. That one hospital. So, you know, it's really an argument with holes in it. The other problem is that if you look at the city of New York and how spread out it is, you can't have one hospital serve. Furthermore, the city hospitals or the municipal hospital system in New York serves the poor and the minorities. And we have the vast majority of our patients are Black or Hispanic, Spanish speaking people. And the old people, the old Jewish people, the old Italian people, especially in our hospital. And these people can't get the same services from the voluntary hospitals that they get from us. Our emergency rooms are fantastic. You don't have the emergency rooms in the voluntary hospitals that you have in the municipal hospitals unless you talking about selling the buildings as they are to the voluntaries. And then they're going to lose anyway because they're never going to pay the city what they're worth. There's a battle now in the Bronx over North Central Bronx Hospital, which was built and has not been opened yet, supposedly to replace Morrisania Hospital. It's a beautiful new building. And the President or the Executive Director of Montefiore Hospital would love to get his hands on it. And they've been a lot of secret dealings going on for the past couple of years to do just exactly that, to turn that City hospital over, to Montefiore Hospitals Center, which is also affiliated as a part of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and make it into a surgical tower, as it were. And what would happen to the people who were served by Morrisania Hospital in the Bronx? Are they going to get the same care at Montefiore? No way.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:12.210
Of course the allegation, and we've talked with Dr. Holleman about this as well, is that the level of care in the city hospitals is not as good as in the private hospitals because there's not as much nursing service, that there's not as much assistance from physicians, et cetera. Is this true? And if it is true, is it a function of money? Is it a function of administration? What about it? What about the quality of care in your municipal hospitals?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:09:41.190
I think in some areas of the municipal hospital system, the quality of care is is the same, if not better. Our emergency care is certainly better than most of the voluntary systems. If you're working with an old building, you go in an old hospital, you don't have telephones, you don't have the amenities that you get in a voluntary system. Perhaps that has some effect on on your care and how you feel being in the hospital. What bothers me is that we find a. we're short of nurses. That's true. We don't have the money. We can't hire nurses. We have to go through a whole rigmarole, which I can explain to you later about how we hire in the hospitals. Now, I mean, it's it's ridiculous. Even the State Health Department came around and audited us and couldn't believe how what we had to go through to hire a nurse. But I'll tell you, something happens in our hospital. And that angers me. And perhaps I shouldn't be saying in public, but it happens all the same if you're in an automobile accident on, say, the Bruckner Expressway. And you are brought into the hospital, Dr. Brown, and you have coverage and and under normal circumstances, you wouldn't take yourself to the outpatient Department of Bronx Municipal to be taken care of. You can afford doctors, private doctors, but you come in an ambulance because you've been in an accident and you go to our orthopedic department in the emergency room because you've got a broken leg. And they closed the door on the orthopod, and say to you, "Well, Dr. Brown, you have coverage. And you look like a man who's used to having good care and you don't want to be in this hospital. There's no phone. The food's not good. Why don't we just transfer you over to XYZ Hospital and you get good care there." Now you're lying there in pain. What are you going to say?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:28.221
I say okay.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:11:28.762
Fine. Exactly. That's just what's going on. And we're losing money and we're losing we're losing face. I mean, patients are going away saying even the doctors are saying the hospital's no good.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:38.732
But why do they do that? Do they really believe that you get better care? Or are they getting a kickback from the other hospitals?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:11:44.841
Let's say there's a lot of money involved.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:47.781
And so you're really making the charge that some of the physicians probably are in collusion with some of the private hospitals or some of the administrators, what have you.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:11:55.463
Or each other. They refer you to another private doctor? [Crosstalk] Collusion's a heavy word, but they're being transferred.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:03.681
Yeah, of course. See, one of the problems is when you make this charge like that, you have to be able to defend it publicly. And when you talk. ..

Patricia Looses Brown 00:12:10.832
I have proof.

00:12:11.091
.. . about confidence in the system, the question is, how do you build confidence in the system if the very physicians and staff people who are in the hospital to say, well, this isn't quite a good hospital, they're gonna do you in if you get caught over there.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:12:25.371
Somehow the other--the doctors and not all of them, because I know a great many of doctors in our hospital, very proud of the hospital, work very hard, care a lot about their patients. Some, frankly, don't. The backbone of our hospital system is not the doctor. It's the nurse. It's the nurse aide. It's the housekeeper. It's the dietary aide. It's all the people. ..

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:45.207
And many of those are minority employees too.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:12:47.602
Most of them are minority employees who would be without jobs, but who really care. Now their morale has been torn asunder. I mean, they're all afraid. Nobody knows who's going to be fired next, if they they work hard and they get nothing for it, they're not getting their raises. The morale is just at its lowest point right now. And now with, you know, with a doctor with an attitude such as I just described, it does not help the system at all.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:12.021
Well, what can the average citizen do to help fight these cuts? You know, the big problem with the citizen or the consumer of the hospitals in New York City is that he never thinks about the health delivery services in the City until he's in need of it. You ask the average guy on the corner, 'What does he think is most important?' He'll tell you the firemen and policemen. I think they should get involved with their hospital. They should visit the hospital. They should come in and work as volunteers. But most of all, listen to what we're saying, read the newspapers and go to their elected officials for support. Exactly what are the public officials, elected officials in New York City doing to fight this crisis?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:13:57.320
Depends on the borough. Some of the elected officials have a greater vested interest depending on the borough. They come from. We have been working in the Bronx very closely with the Coalition to Save Van Etten. Recently the Health and Hospitals Corporation board of directors voted to close the vannett and hospital division of the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:19.700
Now, could you clarify that for our audience? I gather that the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center is made up of Jacoby Hospital, which is in one part of the Bronx and been at the hospital, which was formerly a tuberculosis hospital in another part of the Bronx. Is that correct? No, that's incorrect.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:14:34.520
Bronx Municipal Hospital Center is about 65 acres, Pelham Parkway, East Chester Road and Morris Park Avenue. Vannett and Hospital is just a part of the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center and works very closely with Jacoby. They're approximately 400 feet apart on the same grounds. Our chest services are in vannett in hospital. If someone comes into our emergency room who's been shot in the chest, he will probably go up to the OAH and they'll remove the bullet. And when he's stable, he'll be moved over to Vannett and he may come back and forth for for care or someone in Jacoby Megahed go over to Venette for care and be brought back. But we work very closely. And if they close vannett and we're crippled, totally crippled.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:15:21.410
Do you not have a relationship with the Albert Einstein Medical College? Do they provide services or do they just provide personnel?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:15:29.150
Yeah, they they get close to 30 million dollars a year from the city of New York to provide professional services for our hospital. We have an affiliation with the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Our doctors come through Albert Einstein. The residency program is part of Albert Einstein. The chiefs of service are on the staff of Albert Einstein and many of the technicians and secretaries who work in the professional areas are hired by Einstein tonight.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:00.290
So the reason we are talking with Mrs. Patricia Lucie's Rainford, who is associate director of the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, and we're talking about the fiscal crisis and its impact on the New York City Municipal Hospital system. And as you were saying, Pat, a few moments ago, that there was a plan to close proposal to close Bennett and hospital. And I understand that they've been proposals which have been resisted by Dr. Holleyman and some other members of the board to close hospitals such as Side Anaheim Hospital in Harlem, to close down part of Seaview Hospital and a number of others. Now, the question that the public, I'm sure, wants to ask is, are these closings necessary? Will they save money actually? Will they in any way deprive people from adequate medical care? What about this? What is what is it?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:16:55.940
Is it will they save money? Yes. You know, it depends on how they would close them. I would not want to talk for against closing any other hospitals. I would really like to dress myself to my own hospital. Many hospitals have shown a slowdown in some of their services. I think personally that if we centralize some services, if it for instance, LBG, Y.A. had slowed down, people weren't having as many babies. OK, then we should head on birth rates down. What we would I would propose we have a central LBG Ryan service, municipal hospital service in one one in one borough. However, there's so many other parts and services to a hospital to close an entire hospital down because there are there. Bed rate is down is ridiculous.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:42.590
Why is it ridiculous if you are paying fuel costs and other costs for empty rooms where we're not paying that?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:17:50.060
It's not that simple. Take my hospital. It's registered with the state of New York. Is a 969 bed hospital. Okay? We cannot function as a nine hundred and sixty nine bed hospital because there's another law in a state that says that a patient has to get X amount of nursing hours. Right. If we can't hire nurses because the corporation tells us we can't hire nurses, then we can't bring people into the beds. We are now a 723 bed hospital. Anyone in the mayor's office would tell you we're a nine hundred sixty nine bed hospital and we're not up to sensor's. I say we're one hundred and five percent over census because we have 763 patients who follow that and certainly follow.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:30.860
But the question is, why doesn't the corporation provide the nurses to staff this 900 bed hospital? Because they say they don't have the money. Well, if they say it's probable that they don't have it and that gets us back to where we were at the beginning of the program, why is it that the hospital and health nurse. Corporation is running low on money because the city keeps it. Well, you say the city keeps. Yet the city is going bankrupt. So they can't keep up. They don't. That's their problem. They get the money. Our problem. Citizens in the city.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:19:07.380
They if they get the money from the third party payments and from the patients themselves, they should turn that money back over to the corporation.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:14.460
There's no sense in raping us of the moneys that we need to run our hospital system to run other departments that have possibly mismanaged it, because that's one of the problems that comes about when you have semi-autonomous units within city government, because I believe that your checks do come from the city and a process of the city's comptroller's office. And there is some costs for that type of service. And that might well be the reason why the city wants to keep some of the money zillions of dollars worth. When I say turn it over to us and let us do it ourselves. But of course, if we extend that principle, that means that every one of the semi-autonomous agencies are just developing their own bureaucracies. One of the allegations against municipal hospital services of municipal transit or what have you. Is that whenever you get into government, you build up your bureaucracies, you build up your staff people, you build up your vice presidents. And at one time, I think the Health and Hospitals Corporation did have a long list of people in higher administration making light salaries. Maybe they should have. But I guess the real question is, is there anything that the corporation could legitimately do to cut costs, particularly in this context of fiscal crisis? Sure. I firmly believe that there's a lot of fat lying around. I think and I hate to say this because I like Mike so much, but Mike can't have his finger in every pot and certainly can't be watching everything. I really think that there's a lot of top heavy fat down at central office. Every person who works in any social agency and looks at the executive suites is this fat now without being 3000 people at 125 worth straight? That's ridiculous. The 3000 people in our hospital. Yeah, well, I can understand that the number game, but I'm just I'm I'm raising is that everyone says there's fat somewhere else. And when you begin to point fingers back, oh, Finn, you don't really get to the issue.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:21:08.830
I haven't finished. Let me finish. First of all, there are 3000 people working 125 broadstreet. I don't know where they stuffed them all. If you look at some of the lists they have of the people who are working on per diem making one hundred and fifty two hundred dollars a day. It stinks to high heaven. It really does. The hospitals have people they could get rid of. I hate to say this. I know it's going to sound like I'm anti civil service. You walk around the hospital and you look we have a number of civil servants who work there who have reached the point in life and passed it where they felt interested and excited about their job. They're just working until they get that pension. They are slowing down the system. I wish we had the power to retire. Some of these civil servants, they have a terrible attitude. Their attitude doesn't help some of the other people who come in who are not civil servants. We have a number of provisionals who work there, who do a fantastic job. They're always the ones that get fired first when they start firing people. I'm sure all of the hospitals have civil servants that they could get rid of and function much better. But we don't have that power.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:11.100
Well, that's probably true about every organization as unionization has hit many agencies, including the volunteer hospitals. It's also very difficult to fire people because you do have to fire people cause you can't fire them because they don't smile. Although basically you and I would both like to have pleasant because I don't work well, again, in the sense these are sort of simplistic solutions for complex problem. And the question I want to ask you is, how do you feel and how to some of your colleagues feel? The average citizen in New York City can bring pressure to bear to help improve the situation. And what exactly should the average citizen be asking for the average citizen?

Patricia Looses Brown 00:22:53.710
I think I'm trying to get across, but I don't think it does. The average citizen really. I hate to say, is not interested, not interested in the hospital. They're not interested in their government. The citizens that you see getting involved in the hospital battle, the people who come in the hospitals and join with us in the coalition and are badgering the politicians and sending letters and telegrams are the same people. They get involved in all of the battles who sit on the community boards, who are interested possibly in the long run in public office themselves. The average guy who gets sick and comes to our hospital unless he's angry or he's been kept waiting or he's he's, you know, ticked off about something, is not going to get involved in the battle. We can talk until we're blue in the face.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:36.700
We're still not going to get those average guys out in the street, because if you take that prognosis, that means things will go from bad to worse. Exactly. And I do not believe that the average citizen is really unconcerned about his health and his hospital service. I think many instances he's uninformed and in some instances confused because, for example, in our discussion tonight, we've talked about the hospitals being great and not having enough money. At the same time, we talk about the fact that maybe there's some fat in the budget. So particularly poor people and they hear budgets involving, you know, several dozens of millions of dollars. And I say, well, the money's been wasted, money is being wasted there. They wait for the bureaucrats to make this the decision, but they don't have any faith in the bureaucrats and the politicians. That may be true, but I guess what I'm suggesting is that people who are in the system like yourself and who out of the system like myself, should get to know the facts better and possibly we can coalesce for certain particular ends. For example, there are 18 hospitals. Many of them are almost half empty logic, at least, which you get your facts. Well, I was informed that that was the case. Now, possibly they may not be half empty. There's no hospital in New York City that has 50 percent census. Thank you. OK, well, some of them do have in relationship to their bed capacity. A difference. All right. Now, what do you do about that? Do you really close them even though it is politically inexpedient to close a hospital and people have to go a mile and a half to a hospital is against three quarters of a mile. This is one of the issues that we have to deal with, because New York City is in a tough financial bind and things literally will go from bad to worse unless we begin to conceptualize some of these things.

Patricia Looses Brown 00:25:23.320
All right. There are some hospitals probably if they were closed, it might be an inconvenience for you to ride the bus to buses, to get to a hospital for outpatient care. But if you look at at the emergency care, which is really where it counts, I mean, if you're dying and the hospital down the street has been closed, that ambulance is going to get you somewhere probably as quickly. I don't think there's any fear of losing lives. If if hospitals close, I do not believe that we should close parts of hospitals. There are some small hospitals. Could stand closing, possibly, but I don't think that we should end the municipal hospital system by any means. I don't think that many of us believes it should close. But I think one of the one of the real problems when you talk about a hospital being half empty or 70 percent census, say, are three or four hospitals in the system that are involved in affiliations with with the with other hospitals. And that's where I think the basis of some of your problems are if we could get more cooperation out of the affiliates, if we could get our money's worth out of them, I think our hospitals would be filled up and would be we'd be doing a bang up business. But we're not we're not getting cooperation from the affiliates. We're not getting cooperation from a number of the staff people we have. And morale is low. I don't know what the answer is. I would really like to see the people in our community come into our hospital and join in our coalition to keep vannett and open, to fight for it, to go downtown and be seen and be heard that we have a strange situation in our hospital because we're situated in a middle income Jewish Italian neighborhood that serves the vast majority of our consumers or our black and Hispanic who live just outside of that geographic area. How are you going to get the people across the street from the hospital to come in and be heard to keep our hospital open? When they're not our consumers, they go to Einstein?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:15.450
Yeah, and that part of that has to do with economics and part of it has to do with racism. Absolutely. A recent case, I think, in point is you have an excellent burn center and Jacoby. And there's supposed to be some federal money coming down to develop that. And instead of giving it to the city, the city fathers gave it to one of the private hospital. That's right. Is that because of politics and influence? Because the private hospitals really had a better program. What do you think? Politics and influence and what can the average citizen do again? Nothing. Well, the staff people and I. Hello. And I can speak up and speaking. I hope the average citizen doesn't get burned and try to go that hospital and get some help. Well, course, that's a tough thing. I think every hospital to try to do its best is just a joke. Kobe is highly specialized, as was shown in the Kennedy airplane crash. But I think, again, one of the things that is important is for people like yourself to bring this information to the public and give the public an opportunity to say I was going to do about it so that in the future our New York City hospital situation situation will be better and we'll be better funded. Is that your objective? It's one of my objectives. Thank you. Our guest on the night sole reason has been Mrs. Patricia Lucie's Rainford, who is associate director of the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center. And we've been discussing the impact of New York City's fiscal crisis on the services and the future of the missable hospital system. Thanks again for being our guest on tonight's Sole Reason, Pat. Thanks for having me.

