Speaker 1 00:00:22.240
This is Soul of reason a program that will examine the roots of the black box soul of reason is produced by the W NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 2 00:00:50.070
Outpatient medical care for almost three million New Yorkers is threatened through proposed cutbacks in the ghetto medicine program. Tonight on soul of reason we'll be talking with ivory Carr who is director of outpatient department at the Jewish Hospital and Medical Center of Brooklyn. And we'll be talking about this very very serious problem ivory as we begin tonight's program. Maybe you could give us just a general overview as to what the ghetto medicine program is and what the proposed cutbacks are and what might happen to this program as a result of them.

Speaker 3 00:01:25.980
OK. Initially the ghetto medicine program was an entree for poor people into the health field and direct involvement.

Speaker 4 00:01:37.090
And many of the institutions which provided health services for them. I would say that this or the initiation of this program really represented a carrot and stick approach where the to where the institution was awarded of a sum of money to develop and ambulatory care program according to certain guidelines that were prescribed by the state and by the city. And the process of developing this program the institution had to develop it and the sorry committee and to allow poor people who were recipients of care to come in and participate in planning their care.

Speaker 5 00:02:17.820
Now did this program actually call a ghetto medicine program or is this a generic term it's been given to deal with ambulatory care programs that impacts on areas that are predominately black and Hispanic.

Speaker 4 00:02:30.480
Why it was called the ghetto medicine program because it was supposed to have been designed to focus on the specific health needs of the poor people in the ghetto community. Now all as a result of this program many many ethnic groups benefited from this program. Many institutions benefited from this program but the original focus of the program was to focus on the health needs of the poor community.

Speaker 5 00:02:59.260
And this is very interesting because this is what has happened in the society. I assume that this particular program started somewhere in the 60s during the time of the various unrest in various urban communities. And you're suggesting that the initial focus was to involve more people from the Indigenous communities in planning their own health care. And then you suggested that as a result of this many institutions benefited and as you said many other ethnic groups in the way I would interpret that is that you're saying that the middle class people have benefited from this as well as the poor people. Is this a correct interpretation.

Speaker 4 00:03:39.120
Well certainly there were many positive aspects of the ghetto medicine program all one thing it provided guidelines it suggested programs that should be offered and adulatory care. It suggested a structure that should be developed for all ambulatory care services throughout the city. It designed specific programs which should be offered in emergency rooms in hospitals throughout the city of New York. It also provided a number of jobs for people in the metropolitan area you know for people across the board. These were some of the positive things that came from the ghetto medicine program.

Speaker 5 00:04:18.839.9999999999709
Now you told me before the show began that with these post cutbacks basically from the state and city budgets and I believe the program is funded by federal city and state. That's correct. That's correct. There's most of the money come from federal or from the city and state.

Speaker 4 00:04:37.970
I think most of the money comes from the federal government with the state and the city participating on an equal basis.

Speaker 5 00:04:45.000
I see and with these proposed cutbacks you're suggesting that as many as three million new Yorkers will have their outpatient services curtailed. That seems like an awfully high number of people.

Speaker 4 00:04:59.700
Well under our military care I'm including all the people who would use all clinic services in the metropolitan area because most of the major hospitals do have ambulatory care programs. Most of them do participate in the military care program in some way. This would also involve patients who might use an emergency room in one of the hospitals that have a ghetto medicine program.

Speaker 6 00:05:28.200
So it would be a sizable number of people I would think the 3 million people in the course of a year would be a fair estimate.

Speaker 7 00:05:36.030
Well that's almost half of the population of New York City. And given the fact that next year is about seven and a half million people this suggests that half the people in the city of or is this program one that sort of goes somewhat beyond just the traditional definitions of poverty.

Speaker 6 00:05:56.740
All right. Well let me focus on the Brooklyn community I'm more for me with the Brooklyn community. Any other area in the city now I would say that within the next year about 50 percent of the population of the black community in Brooklyn. And when I say the black community in Brooklyn this is the predominant population in Brooklyn will use services of an amateurish care program during the next year. Our situation is that all our people have come to use the emergency room as they would a private physician because there are very few private physicians left in the neighborhood. So you will find people come into the emergency room for a toothache for coal for all kinds of things which are really not emergencies. And these are some of the services that are offered under the ghetto medicine program.

Speaker 7 00:06:50.110
Now would the funding of the program which I understand is something around 21 million dollars if in fact it is cut now that the total package 21 million both federal and state is that just 21 million from the state.

Speaker 3 00:07:05.110
Well that's the total program. That's the total program for the city of New York.

Speaker 8 00:07:11.620
And if it is cut how many of these three million people might be without services or what kind of services might they be without. All services will be offered in some form or another but in many instances many of these programs will be wiped out completely.

Speaker 6 00:07:30.600
Or not will be in fact this has happened already in some cases where a whole staff of people have been laid off because the budget is just not there. You have a program which was being funded on a grant. Of some of the moneys from the program are reimbursed through third party payers but for the most part the type of program which you have under ambulatory care must have a grant in order to exist.

Speaker 2 00:07:56.200
I think given a specific example of a couple of programs or types of programs that have been or will be curtailed as a result of the cutbacks in the ghetto medicine program. All right. Well.

Speaker 6 00:08:09.190
In terms of specific services which are available to the aged patients over 65 years of age are particularly diabetic patients on services which are offered under podiatry will be eliminated completely and this is a service which is are greatly needed by these patients. All I don't know if you understand all the things that happen in a ghetto medicine program are in an amateur care program by having a budget it provides you with a cushion whereby you'll be able to offer a free service occasionally to people who might not have money to pay for this service. It might be a service which is needed. It might be a situation where there has been a catastrophe of patient might be ill it might be an emergency he might need to be taken care of. All with our grant as a cushion you could provide some of the services which people need are in other words you could afford to give away some services free of charge without the grant it will become increasingly difficult to continue to give voice services that's very into use the time give away services.

Speaker 7 00:09:28.030
I know all of us who've been around hospitals and have heard about the crisis in the city Health and Hospitals Corporation know about the fact that health care has increased in cost and the various third party payments such as Blue Cross and Blue Shield and Medicare and Medicaid are not always covering the cost of the hospital.

Speaker 8 00:09:49.630
And I read somewhere it costs something like one hundred ninety some dollars a day to sustain someone in a hospital like Brooklyn Jewish and the money has to be paid to the hospital absorbs the deficit.

Speaker 7 00:10:04.560
Now one way of solving your deficit you've suggested ghetto medicine program is that some of these deficits are picked up by the funds from the federal or state government but what happens when a hospital really gets deeply in the red where their payments do not adequately cover what they're paying out. What happens to a hospital and this is certainly something is happening to a lot of private hospitals today.

Speaker 6 00:10:34.420
Well a hospital is a business in many cases that's a nonprofit business. We don't look to make a great deal of money but we do look to make enough money to cover our costs and to pay for the costs of the staff and the hospitals to go bankrupt just as any other businesses do in this country.

Speaker 7 00:10:52.590
I think a recent case that that was the author Logan Hospital in Harlem which has had that kind of problem. Well let's take your institution your institution provides a wealth of services to people in the Bedford Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn with the cutback. For example in the ghetto medicine program. What will happen.

Speaker 9 00:11:12.920
Will you just cease to offer services or will you seek to raise money from private donors and some want to make up this deficit.

Speaker 3 00:11:21.470
Or will you refer the patients to other parts of the city. Well it's obvious that some of some types of problems must be referred to other agencies particularly the city.

Speaker 6 00:11:38.150
We will continue to do whatever we can to provide services at this point we haven't to curtail any services at this point. We are still all we are still managed in to survive even though our financial situation is is not that great at this point.

Speaker 7 00:12:00.080
We'll give an example of what would happen let's say there is other cutback in this program. The special work for diabetics is a special work for podiatry patients. The special work for people who have particular types of gastrointestinal problems has to be curtailed. Now what do you do. These people are still sick. They still have these problems.

Speaker 9 00:12:22.070
What do you do you refer them to the city. Do you refer them to another volunteer hospital. You tell them you know sort of cool it and maybe things will get better. Well first I know you don't do the lab first of all we don't.

Speaker 6 00:12:34.610
We don't like to refer patients to other agencies it doesn't help us or it certainly doesn't help our image to refer our patients to other agencies of their arm patients and certain special categories that we do try to give all consideration possible even though we have a ghetto medicine program. We also. Offer services to in many cases an aging population that might have a specific health problem.

Speaker 3 00:13:04.700
Let us say a patient is long patient has cancer and is on chemotherapy. It is possible that all in one encounter in a medical facility he might have or he might create an expense of several hundred dollars say a rough figure three hundred fifty dollars of for all various types of tests and procedures which a doctor my order and is not unusual that a patient will reach a point in his in his care where he might not be able to pay because his funds might be depleted so to speak and this type of situation we do all try to maintain the patient particularly if he's been with us for a long time.

Speaker 10 00:13:57.680
This is the type of patient that we'd like to see particularly because in many cases his illness is terminal and if patients have been under your care for a period of years it's not good to push them out when they can no longer pay for health care because all in all situations in many cases we provide a service for these patients which might not be available in other institutions.

Speaker 7 00:14:27.800
So when that occurs the hospital then it solves the deficit or the medicine program. So that was the combination.

Speaker 3 00:14:34.730
It's a combination of the hospital absorbs as part of the deficit and hopefully all through a grand or through whatever other sources of funding that might be available we'll be able to absorb the rest ourselves.

Speaker 7 00:14:51.230
I don't know. So the reason we are talking with ivory car the director of the outpatient department of the Jewish Hospital and Medical Center of Brooklyn and we were talking about the impact of proposed cutbacks in getting the medicine program on outpatient services for poor people. But as we talk about this every one of the things that comes to mind is this balance between the public and the private hospitals.

Speaker 8 00:15:14.420
We've had Dr. John Holliman on the program when he was president of Health and Hospitals Corporation and he was telling some of the problems at that particular public hospital system was having and he was really saying that the public hospital system was really the primary medical care facility for most poor people. Yet we hear tonight that hospitals like Brooklyn Jewish also involved in providing primary medical care for poor people. What about this. What is the balance between the public and the private is the private pick up where the public leaves off or vice versa. The public picked up where the private leaves off. Where does that balance.

Speaker 3 00:15:59.540
Well I think both of them are doing on both of them are performing a very valid role in providing health care to the populations in the communities which they serve.

Speaker 10 00:16:12.140
I don't think you can say on one necessarily takes over where the other one cuts off in many cases they're providing the same services. And in a city that's densely populated like the metropolitan area there is obviously a need for a great deal of duplication. Now there is also a need to have a municipal health system which will act as a last resort in many cases for patients who who are unable to afford care in any other facility. I think there is a role for the municipal hospital system. I think the municipal hospital system in many cases provides services which. The volunteer hospitals don't provide. In other words or historically they have always provided the psychiatric services which are available in many cases to the whole borough of they provide highly specialized programs for.

Speaker 3 00:17:22.460
Patients such as rape victims and in many cases the other institutions have not had the potential are the resources for developing these programs or in other words one component of a rape program is is to have a great deal of psychiatric services or psychiatric services around the clock.

Speaker 10 00:17:47.210
All of these cases and in many instances are very few and far in between. However when there is a need for this type of service it should be available. So these are some of the things which the which I feel it permissible that the municipal hospital is responsible for providing and should continue to provide. What about the allegation that the might be the other point you mentioned. Now all. I I don't know whether I pointed out or not but I feel that these services should be available to if it's truly going to be a municipal hospital system these services should be available to the public and the public should assume some responsibility for providing these services it should not.

Speaker 3 00:18:35.590
Services should not be offered on one's ability to pay. Now as a result of cutbacks throughout the city and all types of programs I understand that people are being asked to pay for services who go for services at the municipal institutions also.

Speaker 11 00:18:57.080
Well what about the argument that the private institutions could provide the same services that the municipal institutions could provide cheaply and more efficiently. This is the old argument about public versus private. And as you point out before they seem to coexist in a number of places but particularly in terms of the New York situation all these services that are offered by public hospitals that you think might better be offered by private and vice versa. Well I think possibly on the whole system might be or the whole system might be better managed or by a group of private businessmen.

Speaker 3 00:19:49.230
Or if a substantial saving occurred in that system. It would be true. It would be through innovation it would be through greater efficiency by better utilization of staff by possibly retraining of staff that sort of thing and all possibly a more systematic approach to purchasing. Supplies. And possibly developing services. Now I have worked for the city before and I worked for the city for a number of years eight years in fact. And I have seen a great deal of waste a great deal of duplication of a great deal of poor planning and poor management. And I think that not only the municipal system but possibly. All the whole city government in many cases suffers. This now in the in the private sector I think there is a greater attempt to provide better management and direction all for whatever the business is about and I think that this might be the great difference in cause.

Speaker 11 00:21:03.980
One of the suggestions beyond the one you made is that the private hospitals really want to get more of the patients because they want a wider range of medical problems for the interns and others that they are training to work with and some people say that really isn't fair in terms of the larger public for the institution to exist mainly for the benefit of the people who are being trained. Is that a problem or is there some middle ground on that issue.

Speaker 12 00:21:39.320
Well there is a middle ground. We are a teaching hospital but we also provide patient care. We also do a fair amount of research and this is where the balance has to be found. I don't think well particularly for myself. In ambulatory care. Our emphasis is on patient care and the research and training takes place in some other area. These areas are totally separate and I feel that this is the way it should be.

Speaker 11 00:22:11.030
Now of course you use the term teaching hospital and this does get into the overall expense problem frequently the cost the so-called teaching hospitals are higher. Is this because they have more specialists more facilities or is it just a way of subsidizing the cost of providing the teaching.

Speaker 12 00:22:35.690
Well the teaching is certainly a factor and I think we we have to recognize that. But in the process of teaching I think you can also provide better patient care and if you have a teaching institution and the community is the community is allowed to use the resources of the teaching institution I think it ultimately it provides better case better patient care because at some point the residents in Brooklyn will know where to go and get a certain service. And I think this is very important. They know that for certain types of problems they will come to me on for other types of problems they will go somewhere else. I think it's very valid to have a teaching institution all the teaching institution provides an excellent opportunity for the residents an excellent opportunity for the patients. And I think if we can have that balance where we're not 100 percent concerned about research or are 100 percent concerned about teaching it turns out to be very beneficial for all those involved.

Speaker 8 00:23:52.520
Now what about activities on the part of various community groups to attempt to save the ghetto medicine program. What is the status of what you say is threatened by these proposed cutbacks. Is there any light in the window that says that maybe we might be able to stop this and continue this program.

Speaker 12 00:24:08.960
Well as a result of the activity of many organizations in the in the metropolitan area I understand that the state has maintained that there will be a ghetto medicine program at this point. No budget has been allocated for this program. It's just on the books. And hopefully after July 1st we'll have a better idea of what this program will be like in its final form and what services will be curtailed and what services will be will continue to be offered under the program.

Speaker 8 00:24:43.820
Well what can the public do look in the general public do is any person they should write to any place they should call to indicate their support for this program.

Speaker 3 00:24:55.070
I think all the congressmen senators Assemblyman city officials are aware of.

Speaker 12 00:25:04.210
I think they are aware to some extent that there is a health crisis in the city of New York already health crisis brought up brought about because of the large number of people who are unemployed. All by the large number of people who will be affected if the ghetto medicine program is eliminated completely all by the large number of people who currently live in the city. And who are under treatment and various health programs are either think that all our public figures should take a look at some of the specific problems in health care and make an attempt to solve these problems even though we have a Medicaid program a Medicare program ghetto medicine program. There are still many people who fall in between and none of them benefit from any of these programs.

Speaker 2 00:26:12.990
Well you would suggest then that those in the audience who are concerned about the program should contact their local assemblyman a local state senator write to the governor write to the mayor and indicate their support for continuing this particular program. Now you had said that there are gaps. Things that do need to be done beyond ghetto medicine and Medicare Medicaid. What are some of the things that really need to be done. What are some of the gaps that need to be plugged in order to make better health care for poor people.

Speaker 4 00:26:45.960
Well just some little things aside from the fact that we really need a national health insurance program which which I think that the total population could benefit from are those of us who are involved in health care frequently have to deal with many dilemmas which occur. I might mention something which is very controversial to make this point like the abortion program for instance.

Speaker 13 00:27:10.650
I don't think you will find too many people who will agree that the state other cities should be responsible for paying for an abortion. But if if this is true whether or not it's true then I think that family planning services should be free and available to the public. This would take care of a problem. I think that citizens of senior citizens particularly who have made a great contribution to the society and who have worked most of their lives if they. Happen to be overcome by a catastrophic illness. I think this is the type of thing that that could be done to make our health program in the city more viable. I don't think that because someone is 65 years of age. And. Who may be overcome by cancer should be made to spend all of his income sell his house and. Expend all of his resources in order for him to continue to live.

Speaker 2 00:28:24.690
Well you've given us an excellent insight into the need for medical care and also we can see the dedication of you as a person have to providing medical care for poor people. Our guest on the night sole reason has been ivory car director of the outpatient department at the Jewish Hospital and Medical Center of Brooklyn and we've been talking about ways of saving the ghetto medicine program in New York City.

Speaker 14 00:28:44.820
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of that for one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 1 00:28:58.930
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

