Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:00:03.240
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that tells what's happening in Black America. Each week on NBC, leaders and movers in the Black community visit "Soul of Reason" to discuss important issues of concern to Blacks throughout the Americas. I am your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, adjunct professor of education at New York University and President of Bronx Community College of the City University of New York. Our guest this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Calvin Presley, who is Executive Director of Opportunities Industrial Center, Inc., better known as OIC. Glad to have you with us, Cal.

Calvin Presley 00:00:39.960
Oh, thank you Dr. Brown it's good to be here and to share the OIC story with the listeners on "Soul of Reason."

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:00:48.240
Okay. The OIC story is a great story. And since you started it that way why don't you just tell us about the OIC story nationally and tell us a little about OIC in New York.

Calvin Presley 00:00:57.350
Okay. Uhm...Opportunities Industrialization Centers was started in Philadelphia some 15 years ago and it began not as a manpower training and retraining program or a community development program, which it is, but it began as a protest movement. Dr. Sullivan and some 400 clergymen in the Philadelphia community looked one day in the very early '60s and saw that the jobs in their community particularly the service jobs that interfaced with this great Black public...uhm, the jobs were all being held by white people. And part of their concern was to share with the managers of those companies the necessity for getting people that more ably reflected the consumer community to be in the service part of the industry. So they organized what was called a selective patronage program after the corporate leaders and the business people refused to change their hiring practices. And what happened was that after a few months of the boycott the selective patronage program that the businessmen came back and said, "OK we're ready to hire because it was a very effective program and their sales started to slip. But what happened was this large labor pool that Dr. Sullivan and the other ministers determined was out there somewhere looking for jobs and needing employment, really did not have the skills that the new jobs opening up for them for the first time required. And rather than you know tuck their tails and run, they felt a responsibility to bridge that gap between the, this large labor pool untrained and these jobs requiring new skill levels. So Opportunities Industrialization Centers was formed to...to bridge that gap. It initially was funded through private efforts and then Pres...President Lyndon Johnson...uhm, saw it and felt that this was an effective use could be, should be an effective use of the anti-poverty money. And OIC received a national contract. One for funding of its program development in Philadelphia, and then to duplicate that effort in 13 cities around the nation. It has since spread to 144 cities in the United States, New York City being one of them, and then eight foreign countries predominantly in Africa.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:03:41.310
Now I noticed that you said Dr. Sullivan--that's the reverend, ...

Calvin Presley 00:03:45.781
...the Reverend Doctor

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:03:47.431
--and anyone who's heard Leon Sullivan talk about the need for Black America to be involved in corporate and economic structure knows just what a dynamic leader he is. In your case, you are the Reverend Dr. Calvin Presley. Is there anything in the movement that has tended to draw people who come out of the clergy into it, or they use the churches as the main way of getting the program started?

Calvin Presley 00:04:17.279.9999999999709
Well I think that it's, it's safe to say that the OIC program grew out of the concern and the commitment of the Black church at the pavement level, and the nation's urban communities. And naturally some of the leadership for the development of the program, more at the policy level than at the administrative level. OIC board of directors--and we have lay board of directors primarily made up of clergymen and, and people who are connected with churches in communities. The administrative responsibility...I would say that about 15 percent of the people who have the chief administrative responsibility across the country are clergymen so you don't have to be a clergyman to run an OIC program. But I think that what Dr. Sullivan has discovered is that the credibility with the community and the commitment on the part of leadership is essential. And he tries to find the best people to do that, be they clergy or lay.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:05:26.160
I know that many of your programs have a very close articulation with the business and the economic community in the so-called "white economic sector." Is it true that one of the reasons why you are successful is that you and others like you throughout the country are able to appeal to the business sector that, 'This is better than a riot?' 'This is better than a social disruption?' That it's in their economic interest to participate in these training programs, and to provide jobs at the end of the training ?Because I understand one of the reasons why OIC programs are so successful is that in most instances, there are jobs somewhere at the end of the trail.

Calvin Presley 00:06:10.601
I think that our appeal is on the basis that we're an alternative to despair. They're despairing and--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:06:17.034
...despair translates into riots and economic bankruptcy. [laughter]

Calvin Presley 00:06:22.340
But more important, I think that we have developed over the years a partnership and I think that the partnership goes beyond the the business community. Let me just sort of explain how it breaks out, because the key element in any job training program is jobs at the end of it. We insist that we must have and maintain a relationship with the business community: small business, large business, medium-sized business. And the reason that we maintain and cultivate and develop relationships is because we need three things from them. Number one: we need jobs, okay? Two thirds of the jobs in this country are held by the private sector. So for any program to maintain any credibility with the community they have to have access to two thirds of the jobs. One of the reasons we're involved in the business community--and we demand that of the business community--to make jobs available for people we train. Second thing is that with the the varying and changing skill requirement for individuals...that programs, if they're going to be effective, must constantly update their training methods, must constantly uptrain...uh update their their training curriculum, and technical assistance is needed to stay on top of that. And so we require the business community technical assistance for program refinement and for aid. And the other thing--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:07:51.730
Now when you say "We require," you mean for the business community to provide this technical assistance to OIC--

Calvin Presley 00:07:56.590
Yes, to OIC, yes. That's very important. For example--and I'll just give this this one example--on 125th Street, on the east side of 125th Street, we have a computer training division up there where we train 144 computer programmers and operators and key punch ah individuals. Essentially, that program ah is funded, and was initially funded by the IBM Corporation and we have the fourth generation computer equipment ah up there. It's an up-to-date, modern ah facility. The equipment is modern and the program is constantly being refined by a technical advisory committee so that when our young people and and old people alike come through this training program, when they go to get a job the person who's behind the desk hiring has been briefed and prepped as to the extensiveness of the training program. They see the technical assistance that we've received and our people hit the ground running in in terms of their employment. There is not this retraining that companies have to do. We are saying that we don't want you to hire the the technically disadvantaged in terms of skill levels, because that does not represent how modern business or ancient business functions. They want--and I think that we want--an honest day's work for an honest day's pay. And that's our pitch.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:09:25.980
I see where you get an honest day's work for an honest day's pay, that--

Calvin Presley 00:09:29.443
--very much hung up on the Protestant ethic of work. [laughter]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:09:34.060
I happen to believe in it too. But of course there's a lot of people in our community who've been sort of disillusioned by this, because as you know at least in my opinion a large measure of the success of America was built on the backs of Black people particularly during the period of slavery. And then during a period of indentured servitude in the south and in many of our northern communities. So when we talk about the Protestant ethic, that doesn't go very far with a lot of people because we, as a group collectively, Black folks haven't gotten a lot from it. Of course work is important and getting compensated for work is important, but I was in a sense being a little facetious because that is exactly what the business community wants to hear. Yet at the same time, I think should be tempered by the fact that--something you said earlier--that it really is in their interests to train people of all backgrounds, but particularly people who've been on the outside of the system because if people who are on the outside of the system don't find some avenue to get into the system, they in fact will destroy the system.

Calvin Presley 00:10:33.160
No question about it. And I think that it is in their self-interest, it's in our self-interest, it's in the community's enlightened self-interest, to do something about the conditions that exist. I think that uhm the organized efforts to see that workers are fairly compensated...that's essential. And I know of the great horrors and tragedy that happened in our country on the basis of this ethic and I think that it was a corruption of that ethic, where individuals were exploited, that ah I ah certainly would not agree with, and certainly hope that we would not be trying to convince businesses that we would stand for any further exploitation of our people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:11:21.101
Now I've heard both you and Leon Sullivan say that to the business community. Let's talk about some statistics. How many programs do you have in New York City, how many people are involved in them? And then of course, how do some people in our listening audience get into these programs if they're so inclined?

Calvin Presley 00:11:36.401
OK. Dr. Brown, it's almost...we're growing at such a rate it's kind of difficult to keep track. But let me see if I can divide our services and our service area for you. Our primary focus has been classroom training, all right? So we have a classroom training division. And part of that ...responsibility--well let me just describe what we do in the classroom training program. First we provide a general orientation and counseling program to help people who come to our program looking for particular kinds of skills, ah looking for a job get properly tracked it into our program. Then we provide remedial education, okay? We don't call it "reading, writing and arithmetic," but essentially that's what it is...to get the people who come to us back into thinking, get the cognitive skills working again. But you know, working at learning again. And then we get them involved in the skill area of their choice. Now we offer skill instruction in 13 areas--it ranges from computer programming to food service and restaurant practices, ah but not all the same courses are offered at the same centers. And finally, the classroom training division has the responsibility of placing the individuals we train on the job because that's the bottom line. We have six training facilities for classroom training. There is a training facility in the Bronx on Webster Avenue, 1668 Webster Avenue. There are two ah in Harlem, one on 132nd Street and--134th Street, I'm sorry--and Lenox Avenue, and the computer training division on 125th Street between Second and Third. We have a training facility on the Lower East Side at 614 East 14th Street. The first training center in Bedford Stuyvesant in the city of New York of OIC is in Bedford Stuyvesant, at 1024 Fulton Street. It's our largest single training facility in the City. On Merrick Boulevard in Queens is the perhaps the newest and--it's the smallest, but it's the newest training center that we have. Then we move into what we call our Employment Services Division. We provide direct employment services ah as a part of our work here in New York. And the Employment Service Division has several components. One is the public service employment ah program, and we hire some 100 people in public service employment. We act as an umbrella agency for 11 community groups, and they range from the Episcopal Mission Society to the the Division of Smaller Churches in Harlem to Boricua College. In other words, we develop projects with these groups and and we serve as an umbrella agency. Then we run a major on-the-job training contract where where we pay employers to train people that we recruit and employ in their program, and we have a contract with the City of New York to do job development for the OJT program for some 300 enrollees. Now we have a new program as a part of the president's youth initiative but still as a part of our employment services division, we have a new programs for youth. We have the Youth umh Community Conservation Improvement Program where we have 50 youth employed in Bedford Stuyvesant in a program that is developing some public buildings and restoring some some public facilities in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn. We have the the uhm YET program or the Youth Employment and Training Program, and that program operates in the Bronx and in Queens. We have a career intern program that is funded nationally as a part of a national demonstration through the uhm National Institute of Education of HEW. And here ah we're developing an alternative high school; for the first time we're getting cooperation nationally with school systems around the country, locally. Where we're having an interface between community groups in the schools where we ah take those youngsters who have dropped out of school, and who won't go back into the into the regular public school, we maintain them on the school records but provide them with sufficient Carnegie units to to get a high school diploma. And the local high school grants the diploma because our teachers are certified, etc. And that's happening in New York as a five-city demonstration project around--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:16:43.651
Where is that particular project located?

Calvin Presley 00:16:45.521
That's in Bushwick, too. The feeder school is the Boys and Girls High School, and recently you read in the paper about the problems they were having with that school and some creative leadership on the part of the principal to respond to us as an alternative and it's it's only indicative of his other creative abilities because he's beginning to come to grips with the management of that school and I think that this program is going be all right, as well as Boys and Girls High School.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:17:10.359.9999999998836
Now in terms of this whole range of programs, if someone wants to get involved...let's say that someone who doesn't have a job or has a low paying job wants to be retrained and so on...how do they go about getting [into] the program? Who do they call, how do they follow up?

Calvin Presley 00:17:25.839.9999999998836
All right. I could give you 10 telephone numbers--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:17:28.359.9999999998836
Can you give us one? [laughter]

Calvin Presley 00:17:28.366
--but then that wouldn't be helpful. I will give you one. And our central office is at four-six-oh, Park Avenue South. That's at 31st Street. We're on the 12th floor. And our number is area code two-one-two-seven-two-five-eight-three-eight-three. If you call our receptionist, our telephone operators will be able to properly refer you to the branch and/or program that ah would be in line with your interest.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:18:01.420
All right. Tonight on "Soul of Reason," we are talking with Calvin Presley, who is Executive Director of Opportunities Industrialization Centers, Inc., OIC. And anyone in the audience who is interested in contacting OIC, you can contact them at four-six-oh Park Avenue South or call area code two-one-two-seven-two-five-eight-three-eight-three. And you've been talking about this whole range of programs. One of the things that crossed my mind as you were talking is that you're sort of a miniature HEW, or miniature Labor Department. And one of the concerns that grew out of the anti-poverty movement is the fact that in many communities the anti-poverty structure really became sort of a quasi public structure, and also became a place where it was alleged at least that a large amount of political influence and political activity took place. I noticed you were very careful in your analysis to talk about your relationship to industry and business and education and so on. To what extent, as you get a network--now you have 144 cities, I believe involved in OIC--to what extent do in fact you have a bureaucracy being created and in some way begins to mimic some of the things that are done through government, and then what's your reaction to that?

Calvin Presley 00:19:22.690
All right.[coughs] I think that umh bureaucracy--as well as being a set of boxes--is a state of mind, and it has umh more to do with one's ability to to limit rather than to empower. I think that our commitment is to...empower, to help okay? Our motto is we we help others to help themselves. And I think it is the commitment to helping that umh kind of prevents, you know, the the structure from forming to be a stopping stumbling block rather than a stepping stone. I think that there is a danger, there is a tendency to become too big. You say that we sound like a mini Labor Department, a mini-HEW. We constantly, here in New York, ah struggle with that that problem of of growth and development. And quite frankly in the throes of trying to determine you know how we put a fence around this ranch so that we can really work at program refinement and becoming more, a more, effective deliverer of of services. I think that one thing that has been you know clearly absent from from OIC is really the lack of of the political influences directed at our program where...[clears throat] I don't think you can say we're apolitical, but we press the federal government, local government, state government real hard to be more responsive to the needs--the employment needs--of individuals.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:21:13.060
Well...you talked about New York City. Black people in New York City are having a really hard time now. The unemployment rate is double, sometimes triple that, of white New Yorkers, and I understand the unemployment rate among youth in New York City is about 40 percent among Black and Hispanic youth in the age bracket 18 to 24.

00:21:32.501
Your program is a target program. Imagined...what's the total number of people you service in a given year?

Calvin Presley 00:21:37.932
About three thousand.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:21:38.830
About three thousand. We're talking about literally tens of thousands, maybe even hundreds of thousands of people in New York City who are without jobs. Minority people. One suggestion is programs like OIC show what can be done but obviously can't meet the need that we have in the entire city in terms of training and economic development. What in your opinion needs to be done to begin to turn things around in New York City economically for Black and Hispanic people?

Calvin Presley 00:22:16.180
Well first thing I'd like to talk about is the jobs, and the agency that has the responsibility for the management of New York City's labor force primarily--let's call that the Department of Employment, which is a part of the Human Resources Administration, and where much of the funds of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act are are directed to and through. And the City of New York has a 33-million dollar commitment in terms of funds out of its tax levy dollars for that agency for the Department of Employment's effort. I'd have to say that, unfortunately, the Department of Employment gets effected by political forces to such a degree that it has a very difficult time responding positively to programs. Now, it is because of our national involvement and because our involvement at the local level that we've been able to attract what I think is substantial funding for our program efforts. The unfortunate thing is that--that when we demonstrate what can be done, everybody wants to discount it as...you know, 'All right it's a demonstration, it's a fluke and we can't impact the other programs.' Well the reality is that that if the city of New York were serious about the operations of its manpower programs, it could really draw on the success of this model and measure the funding of its other classroom training programs and OJT programs by it. Ah I think that in the early days of the Comprehensive Employment and Training program that we did have some impact on the other major classroom training program, the Board of Education. When we entered the training business some 10 years ago, the Board of Education's training costs for their MDTA program was something like twelve thousand dollars, okay? And ours was something like seventeen hundred dollars. Well then it became clear that something was wrong. I mean we were essentially doing the same things. Now, their costs have come down dramatically. And I want to testify that they've come down dramatically, and now they're around six thousand dollars. Now we're up to--because of inflation and other things--about twenty seven hundred dollars, but our participation demonstrated that it could be...done and it could be done more effectively and more efficiently and more cheaply. And I think that has impacted the delivery of manpower services. I would hope that this administration would be sensitive to that. We could not do it all. I don't want to do it all. But we want to see that the others become more effective.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:10.910
For example, what is your total budget for the programs that you operate?

Calvin Presley 00:25:14.771
About eight and half million dollars.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:15.741
All right, eight and a half million dollars. Now that is federal money and some City money? Or mostly federal money?

Calvin Presley 00:25:21.572
Uhm, about 7 million dollars of federal money. The other million and a half: City money.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:30.591
I see, because I notice that right now one of the main concerns has to do with the CETA program, a Comprehensive Employment Training Act program and many cities throughout the country re using it to keep civil service workers on the payroll. For example in Detroit, Michigan, I think something like 30 percent of the police force are CETA. I think here in New York City by possibly 15 percent of the fire and policemen are on CETA. And it was suggested that this was necessary to keep city services from falling apart. On the other hand, this bill was initially developed to help poor people who didn't have jobs. And right now there's some great argumentation going on in the Congress and in the City and state as to whether we should go back to the original purpose and limit the expenditures of CETA money to those who are unemployed and not just laid off from city lines. What do you think about that? Where do you think we ought to be going with the federal employment effort and the state and City concomitance of that effort?

Calvin Presley 00:26:33.770
Well you've got two things going here and I think that the initial CETA program that was developed--by the Nixon administration, mind you, in 1973 and signed into law by him in November of '73--was really an attempt to get at the structurally unemployed. People who were structured out of the labor market because of lack of skills, because of the way the labor market was changing, and an attempt was developed to get them back in through training. What has happened is that the bottom of the economy fell out and so the government needed a tool: the Public Service Employment Program, Title VI, as a countercyclical effort to to to shape this poverty thing. What's happened is that the cities, large and small you know, verging bankruptcy decided that this was a way for them to keep their employees on. I think that--and I wrote an article in our magazine called a Terran--I called it the rape of CETA initially when it came out, and I think that it has given rise to the kind of continuing suppression of of of hope and interest on the part of people to work themselves out of the conditions of poverty that they find themselves in. I would hope that we'd get back to targeting to affect the structurally unemployed.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:57.650
Well see this has a direct relationship to the political activity and political awareness in the black community. What do you think can be done to improve the political awareness of Blacks in New York?

Calvin Presley 00:28:07.940
Well I think that if for no other thing, we...should see and see very clearly that all of this is connected, and we take the elimination of the only Black that sat on the Board of Estimate. I think that Black people are in real trouble in this city. I think that we're going to have to get out and make some demands in this election year to Mr. Cary, and we want to help to remind him that he's done a terrible job as far as Black people are concerned. In his last administration...if he's not going to do better we're not going to support him. I think that we have to keep Mr. Koch's attention...unless some very unfortunate things are gonna happen in this city. But I think that all of this should remind Black people that they need to get out because the power of the ballot also produces money in the pocket.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:28:59.592
Because I would submit that they have to get out long before Election Day.

Calvin Presley 00:29:03.840
Oh no question about it--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:29:04.920
--at the time that the candidates are being selected and the decisions are being made as to what particular stances those candidates are going to be taking. And I would hope people like Calvin Presley would help to bring it to the fore.

Calvin Presley 00:29:15.910
Well, we've been encouraging our people to become more aware of the effects of politics on their lives.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:29:23.410
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Calvin Presley who is Executive Director of Opportunities Industrialization Centers in New York City. Anyone wanting information about them should call seven-two-five-eight-three-eight-three. This is Roscoe Brown. Saying 'so long' for "Soul of Reason." This program is produced by the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University in association with NBC.

