Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:03.210
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that tells what's happening in black America. Each week on NBC leaders and movers in the Black community visit "Soul of Reason" to discuss important issues of concern to Blacks throughout the Americas. I'm your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., adjunct professor of Education at New York University and president of Bronx Community College of the City University of New York. And with us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Robert Earl Jones, distinguished actor, patron of the arts, scholar, athlete and a number of other things. And glad to have you with us tonight Robert Earl.

Robert Earl Jones 00:00:41.340
Dr. Brown, this is a happy day for me. I've been looking forward to this for a good many weeks. [laughs]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:48.390
Well let's talk about Robert Earl Jones the athlete because a lot of people know about Robert Earl Jones the actor but, why did I call you an athlete?

Robert Earl Jones 00:00:56.430
Well, as a kid, a youngster in my teens, my friends convinced me because of my long, long arms and my height, I should be a prize fighter. I don't know why. [laughs] But I started training and started running, and found that it was very good for my health. Of course, I wanted to be a boxer like Gene Tunney and not like Jack Dempsey, which is a slugger. I really wanted to be a combination of what I used to read about Jack Johnson. Well, I went in there and it was just kind of rough. [laughs] But I found that it was very good for my health. And then along, about, or seven years ago, I found that I couldn't run because of arthritis, and I went back to training lightly--runnin', joggin'. And a couple years ago I started running with, with the marathoners. And I've been keeping it up ever since. And just, being a little more disciplined and careful with my health, that's all. Just, I just enjoy it. And then, what I forgot, had forgotten, was that you run and take your time, and just jog--anywhere more than an hour--not, not running, but to exhaust yourself. You get a terrific high. And it's the most beautiful feeling that I've ever had except at the period when I was 10 years old in Mississippi, when I got religion, and that was a happy feeling too. [laughs]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:25.310
And that's very interesting because a number of people now are turning to exercise and discipline and particularly running, jogging.

Robert Earl Jones 00:02:32.651
Yes, yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:33.041
And I know you participated in the marathon.

Robert Earl Jones 00:02:36.491
Yes.

00:02:37.361
You won the New York Marathon.

Robert Earl Jones 00:02:39.731
Mhm, yeah.

00:02:39.733
You've been in there twice, I believe.

Robert Earl Jones 00:02:41.230
One of the oldest. And I'll get around to being, hopefully, one of the youngest. [laughs]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:46.710
That's very good. All right, well let's talk about the Robert Earl Jones that most people know--it's Robert Earl Jones, the actor. You have been acting for many, many years. You have a number of distinguished roles, and you have a way of interpreting whatever role you're playing in a way that people remember. I think people remember some of your movie roles, such as Luther in "The Sting." They remember some of your Shakespearean roles.

Robert Earl Jones 00:03:09.671
Right.

00:03:10.121
And they remember some of the soliloquies that you've done.

Robert Earl Jones 00:03:13.001
Yes, well--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:13.690
What are some of the things that you've done most recently that the public might be aware of?

Robert Earl Jones 00:03:18.792
Most recently, I did a successful production segment with Lou Grant and it was around the character, Earl Humphrey, that I played, and that was a beautiful experience. And I had three segments of a daytime soap, soap, "Search for Tomorrow," and that, I was most relaxed in that. Of course, everyone thought I was a painter, in my neighborhood--I live in the village--says, "I didn't know you was a painter, Mr. Jones!" I said, "You didn't?" [laughter] I couldn't, you know, I couldn't break the illusion. You know?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:54.091
You couldn't break the illusion.

Robert Earl Jones 00:03:55.471
Yeah, that was, I played Earl Humphries, the painter who had, have his neighborhood torn down, and with that went his works, which had done on his wall. I liked that, but I like all phases of acting: on the stage, the video, screen. It's all good.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:16.880
Well how did you get into acting? Because you started acting in a time when not too many Blacks were really into it.

Robert Earl Jones 00:04:22.280
No, and I didn't have much, I wasn't encouraged, because it was the advent of the talkies in, in the early 30s, and the little community theaters, and national theaters, and road companies was fading out. That, that occupied, gave Black people vaudeville and there was one remaining landmark with the Lafayette theater in Harlem, that had spawned such great actors as [pauses], now, you mean to say I can't think of his name, the great, great-- [crosstalk begins]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:55.216
Didn't Noble Sissle and

Robert Earl Jones 00:04:55.220
Eubie Blake-- Noble, [inaudible] Blake, and all of those people, yeah.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:55.228
some of those folks play at the Lafayette Theater?

Robert Earl Jones 00:05:00.140
[crosstalk ends] Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:00.751
We know we have the new Lafayette Theatre--

Robert Earl Jones 00:05:02.151
Charles Gilpin, the great, great actor who started the whole thing going down, downtown. And "Emperor Jones," you know, and, of course, then you had Paul Robeson come behind those great people, and just kept the fires a-burning.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:18.310
Well, I know that you have a great interest in Paul Robeson. [pauses] Yes, because you knew Paul, but also because your son, James Earl Jones, played in the recent one man show on Robeson.

Robert Earl Jones 00:05:30.411
Yes, yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:30.770
Which is, you know, is very controversial.

Robert Earl Jones 00:05:32.691
A whole lot of talk about it and, and every time, Dr. Brown, one of the amazing things. All of the people. Every night. There was a standing ovation, to the person. Every night. And yet, I think the man was too, too newly gone for them to see him on the stage. For a lot of the people. And if they'd just fought, those people who was fighting to keep the play off Broadway, if they'd just fought. If they'd have been down with Paul [unintelligible] when I had to go down there, to protect him when, when he was alive, it would have been much better, much better.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:14.170
Well, tell us something about your recollections of Paul Robeson. In my opinion, Paul Robeson is one of the greatest of Black Americans.

Robert Earl Jones 00:06:22.381
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:22.621
He is a person, when I was a youngster, he was an image, because he was a scholar

Robert Earl Jones 00:06:27.110
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:27.112
He was an athlete, he was an actor--

Robert Earl Jones 00:06:29.161
He was a very warm person, a very warm.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:29.171
He was a political advocate, and as you say a very warm person.

Robert Earl Jones 00:06:33.240
Yes. Easy to get to know, especially if you were in the arts. I would go to his church, his brother's church in Harlem, and I would go backstage and sometime we'd have him just, half a dozen of us young people around, especially when he was doing "Othello." We'd have him and we'd talk with him. So encouraging. I tell you, one of the things that helped me as an actor, even now, when I go to a college, I have to tell how I got to be able to stand and do two monologues, one's tears and other's laughter, all in 20 minutes, is what he gave me. I says, "Paul, how do you, how do you reach such height? In the scene with Iago on Act 3 Scene 3 in the latter part where he's--in rage!--and he never, never loses breath, never get out of control, with himself." He said, "Breath control." And you know when he went on the road with the play and he came back, I had worked very hard, just during that scene alone, and I found out just what--as a singer, of course he understood--I had to work for it, work for it. And I found by just controlling the breath, you were able to bring tears or laughter. And I use, example I use, Richard Wright's "Between the World and Me," [pauses] for tragedy. I use, Paul, Paul Dunbar's "The Party" for hilarity.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:57.561
Can you do one of those for us?

Robert Earl Jones 00:07:59.660
Well, I'll tell you what. Let me just paint a picture that--the man who put me in the theater, Langston Hughes--he, it's called "The Negro Speaks of Rivers." [begins recitation] I've known rivers. I've known rivers ancient as the world and older than the flow of human blood in human veins. My soul has grown deep like the rivers. I bathed in Euphrates when dawns were young. I built my hut near the Congo and it lulled me to sleep. I looked upon the Nile and raised the pyramids above it, and I heard the singing on the Mississippi when Abe Lincoln went down New Orleans, and I've seen its muddy bosom turn all golden in the sunset. I've known rivers. Ancient, dusky rivers. My soul has grown deep, like the rivers. [ends recitation]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:04.971
That--

Robert Earl Jones 00:09:05.030
That's by Langston Hughes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:05.791
That happens to be one of my very, very favorite poems--

Robert Earl Jones 00:09:08.962
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:09.651
Because it expresses the trials, tribulations, and journeys of Blacks throughout the world, and I only had an opportunity to talk with Langston Hughes on few occasions--

Robert Earl Jones 00:09:23.180
Yes, yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:23.690
I gather you knew him and knew him well.

Robert Earl Jones 00:09:25.092
He was a modest man.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:26.450
Very modest man as you were--

Robert Earl Jones 00:09:27.861
And never was-- Reciting his poem, I could just see the modesty. I said, "How could this man who is so modest, and so self-effacing, dig down so deeply and say something so beautiful?" That's right. He's, he was almost shy. [laughs] Yet, he would, he would get out the whole sting of the people, their feelings and everything, and his "Let America Be America Again," his-- "I Am the Black, A Brother" Yes. "I Am the Darker Brother" Yes, I loved that, I used to love that one. The one, the other, "The Negro, I am a Negro, Black as the night is black." And, Dr. Brown, this was a period, you know, the eb of the Negro, of what we call the Negro Harlem Renaissance. And, you know you can get a fight very quick if you just call someone in anger "Black," you see. [laughs] Of course at the same time, you could use the word, what in, in, in some circles is considered derogatory, you could use "nigger" in, in warmth, and you get a good laugh, because we laugh, we laugh at ourselves as well as fight, too. Well, going back to this whole range of emotions that an actor has to play. It's very interesting, in your description of how Robeson said, by breath control, you can-- Yes, oh yes, yes. You can deal with humor, and you can deal with pathos and sadness--how do you do that? Well, I tell you. I was down at Voorhees. Down to Denmark, South Carolina, at Voorhees University, and I did my last, there I call it "the trilogy," and I says, and then I told the experience that I had with Paul Robeson, and after the, after the, the program, the concert I call it. One of the, one of the students says, "Brother Jones," says, he almost said, "I just don't believe you can show me how to cry." And I call him up and I said, "Now you listen to me breathe." And I went through it. It was, we used, we used "The Crucifixion." "Jesus, my gentle Jesus [breathes] walking in the dark of the garden, the Garden of Gethsemane, saying to his three disciples, sorrow's in my soul, [breathes] even until death, tarry ye here a while and watch with me [breathes]. Jesus. [breathes] My burden, Jesus, praying in the dark of the garden, [breathes] the Garden of Gethsemane. Talking to his Lord. Father. [breathes] Oh, Father. [breathes] Oh, Father, this cup, this cup. [breathes] This bitter cup. [breathes] Let it pass. Let it pass. Jesus, my lonesome Jesus." And goes on, and it goes on, and it builds. That's why Robert Earl Jones is a great actor. Well, I don't know about that, but I still love it. [laughs] There's has-- Now if you notice-- to be something more than this-- Now, if you notice, if you notice doctor, of course I exaggerated the breathing here. So, so this student could, could understand what it was, but just reading it, I mean--to an audience--you wouldn't, you wouldn't hear my breathing, it'd be quiet, you know? Sure. [laughs] I know a number of actors, they talk about "psyching themselves up." Yeah, yes, yes. And I know some of the really great actors and they go in the dressing room, or they walk off on the side, and they "psych themselves up." Yes, yes. And being in athletics myself I know that one of the things that you do-- I knew it was something doctor I couldn't figure out about you. [laughs] With athletics-- How you could do so much, my god! [laughs] You psych yourself up. Yes. Really, as a matter of fact, you, a really great athlete, when the game gets tough, you want to be at bat. You want to get that ball. Yes, yes. You want to catch that pass because that's part of being an athlete. Now, in the case of an actor--it appears to me that actors are people who are sensitive to the emotions of, of others and to the concerns of the world. But I found very, very few actors who really advocate social causes that are negative for people. They might be personally egotistical. That's right. But in terms of advocating negative causes, I find very few actors who advocate things that are really negative most actors have a very great acceptance of a wide range of social concerns. That's why the same with the musicians as you, as we know you know in the late, middle thirties with the musicians that kind of just walked right in and broke, broke down discrimination. People in the arts. Yes, yes. Beautiful, beautiful medium. All right, now we've gone through the pathos. What about the humor? How do you get to the humor? The humor, oh! Well. Well you take, [laughs] I'll give an example. The, see you do it in medium. "There's a great big party down at Tom's there the other night. Was I d'ere? You bet. Never in my life seen such a sight. Folks from four plantation were invited, and they come, they come troopin' thick as chil'en when they hear the fife and drum." And it goes on, and it rides on, and by the time it gets to one of the scenes. And they see, he's so vivid. I'll tell the title of this poem "The Party" by-- [in unison] Paul Laurence Dunbar And when you get to the actor himself if he doesn't know about the activities--the one of the things that's great about James Earl--he carried it out. He just doesn't read the sonnet or read the poem. He acts it out, too, you know. He, he physicalizes it. And here, you're compelled to visualize what--you see, you're talking about so many people in this party it's about two dozen people you're carrying on. It's a dance and everything. And there's gals, let's see, "All the people dressed their finest. Hair brushed back as thick as grease. Eyes are battin'. Teeth are shining. Not a wrinkle nor a crease." You know? And, and, and you begin to see the people that, that he, he's talking about. Well this is part of that psyching up we were talking about. Yeah. Yeah that's right. You really are visualizing. Yeah. And it speaks of how the people is putting on airs, you see? How they come in their tuxedos and as they are aping the bosses really. [laughs] Of course for the audience-- The cake walk and all of that. You're talking about the great, Black poet Paul Laurence Dunbar. Yeah, this is--  Who was a great poet-- Antebellum period. At the turn of the century. Yeah, that's right. He used a lot of what we call Black dialect. Yes. Yes. Many of us who went to Black schools--I happened to have gone to Dunbar High School Oh, so rich! In Washington, DC-- Yes, yes, yes. Are familiar with that, and you learned and you spoke the poetry of Paul Laurence Dunbar. Sure. Literally every week. A number of people felt, particularly as Blacks became a little bit more highfalutin'--cultured, as it were. Yeah. Yeah. That Dunbar's poetry-- Put 'em down! Was too much of the lower class. Yeah. That's [laughs] The part they don't realize is that Dunbar was a part of the people. That's right, that's right. And the, the artist must represent the people where they are. Yes. Yes. On one hand and, yet, set a target or dream for people on the other which is Yes. Someone like Langston Hughes did for us. And how, how we get to the--he's out of breath. He says, [laughs] one example is and then he says, "And we'd like to-- the party like to broken up if Tom's wife, Mandy, hadn't happened on the spot to invite us out for dinner. [breathes] And, [breathes] I'd like to tell you about it--what we had. [breathes] But I ain't able." You see and that's, you know. Beautiful, beautiful. Yeah. Just, "But I ain't able." And then you'll, you'll, you'll bring that on to it, just out of breath from laughter at some of the scenes, yes. Tonight on "Soul of Reason," we are talking with Robert Earl Jones who, as you hear, is a distinguished actor and we're talking about some of his experiences and what's happening to Black actor in America. And you've had the opportunity on some occasions to act with your son, James Earl Jones. And I was just wondering how you feel about that. I mean we have father and son teams in sports and politics, and certainly in business--we call it nepotism in business, I think. Yeah. [laughs] And how do you feel about it? You two seem to be very similar in many of your reactions, I know that. It was almost too similar for him in his, in his growing into his stardom. But now he's very at ease with himself and he's anxious that we get together and do something, you know. For instance, we were interviewed a couple of months ago on the Channel 2, Vic Miles show. We were interviewed, and the play was going hot then, is controversial, the play "Paul Robeson." And he asked me to do a scene, do Othello and he did Iago, you know. And he was terrific as Iago, and he does want to do, do Iago, and so I'm very happy about it. And so I'm going to his speech teacher myself. [laughs] I'm going to audition for "Othello." Oh, I did, I did "Othello." It's, we have a tape of it, yeah. You said something very important. You said, you going to his speech teacher. I have heard many, many of the distinguished actors say that they were going to take lessons. Oh yeah. At the very time that they were on Broadway or-- That's right. Or doing a play. I think Speech is just like music, you gotta work at it. I think that's instructive. Sure. That's instructive to everyone who aspires to a career in the arts or in music. That's right. The fact that you don't stop. I understand that Arthur Rubinstein, who is now, what, ninety-two years old, or something like that. Yes, yes, wonderful. Practices five and six hours a day, every day. Oh yes. It's essential. And you have to practice your, your craft. It's like even a golfer I read that, was it Tom Watson had been away from the tour for about three weeks. When he went back he said it took him another two weeks to get his timing back. Right. And that doesn't mean that you can't function, but to function at the height of your powers. That's right. You have to take a lesson. Sure, yes. Now what is your favorite role? Of all the roles that you have played--I won't just give you one--I'll say your two favorite roles. You know what? To tell the truth, I'll, I'll take three. The third one is one I'm currently in.[laughs] Because, well right now I'm working at my concert for the colleges during the fall, primarily Southern colleges. And that is all, all of the phrases, I'm bringing it from Paul Laurence Dunbar to Paul Robeson. In other words, about a hundred years of poetry and it's so rich. It's so rich. It's so, so beautiful. So much humor. So much--even comedy. You know, you'll find, I think you'll find more comedy of the Black people they're able to laugh at themselves as well as with themselves. And bring out the truth. Some great people have written poetry. James Weldon Johnson from, wrote, you know, creation, crucifixion. What is it? In the segment [crosstalk] James Weldon Johnson-- "God's-," "God's Trombone." Yeah. Oh okay, "God's Trombone," and [unintelligible] it's a whole trilogy type. Yeah [unintelligible]. And oh some of the, some of the brief ones. The one who wrote, did, did the poem, for instance: when Churchill was here for the Congress and the Senate. He spoke, you know, spoke to them just before we got into the war, he used one of, "If we must die," and it's by Claude McKay. Yeah. Claude McKay. Use it. Used his poem right in the middle of his speech. "If we must die, let it not be like hogs, hunted and penned in an inglorious spot!" Oh, it is so powerful. But, see, history is so rich. And matter of fact, I would've never been in the theater. Nothing that brought me into the theater made me think that I could have had an opportunity worth my while to be in the theater. Of course, that was my shortcoming, as a farm boy, come right up and was in theater in five years after I got from Mississippi here in New York. It, but for the history that tells. It tells. You know I thought very simple poems telling, "I am a Negro black as the night as black. Black like the depth of my Africa--" always wanted to do that. And you know, I finally got around to doing it on the, on the radio. Everybody should know that, have that pride you know, have that pride in their color. And poets that played a great role in, of course in black history. Black history making us very proud. I need that very much. And the poem just spoke of is Dubois' "I Am the Smoke King." W. E.B. Du Bois. "I Am the Smoke King," where he talks about his Blackness and his heritage. You see now, there again, I'm ashamed to say that I know his "Litany of Atlanta," written on a special occasion, Atlanta, written on our day of death, 1906. But I didn't, I didn't know "The Smoke King," see there's no compilation--I'm gonna check to see if there is a compilation of his poetry. There really is not. Actually-- Yeah. You pick these things up by-- Well this one. Reading as much as you can read, and talking to people like yourself, and talking about-- This one, "I am a Negro, Black as the night is black," is by Langston Hughes. That's one of, but Dubois uses that same theme-- Ah! Oh and just a beautiful, forceful poem. Yes, and see now I have to go to the Schomburg, now to look these, these up. That's wonderful. That's-- I know, as you mentioned, the Schomburg. Yes. The Schomburg Collection. They now call it the Schomburg Research Center on Afro-American Culture and History. Yes, yes. And it's one of the great places in our city, and anyone who wants to find out anything about Black people, anywhere, ends up doing research at the Schomburg. Every novel, every poet, his work, work is to be found there, yeah. We've had Jean Hutson and Ruth Anne Stewart of the Schomburg on our program. Yes. On occasion, and I think it's important to recognize the significance of a social institution like this. Because one of the things that I am impressed with, as I talk with people like you, is that the heritage of Black people covers a whole range of experiences. 300 years, oh yes. 400 years. That's right, yes. [laughs] A thousand years. Five thousand years. The point being, however, is that in this day of the 70s, where many of our young people in particular think that the problems we face are just problems that have just occurred, and that we have not been able to resist and to conquer some of these problems--is just not true. And we just have to continue to understand where we are. Now, one argument is, if we were so successful why are we in the shape we are in today? The other part of that is that if we hadn't of struggle as we have struggled, we would be worse off now than we are today. In the context of a society where race is a particular factor. To keep up, you've got to struggle. To keep up you've got to struggle. You've got to struggle. It's just a-- All right, but we've got to get back to your favorite roles. [laughter] You took me off of that. You took me into the three other things. Okay. Well, I'll tell you I, I must admit that, because the structure of the play "Othello" is, is so, so beautiful when you read it. It's like an ocean. It ups and downs and ups, and especially in the third act. It is my favorite--to get into the classics--my favorite. And I kind of had given up on it and now I'm determined, I'll use the cassette that I have-- video set--to show the real prototype of Iago, because unless Iago is believable, Othello is going to look very stupid. Iago becomes very believable and very dangerous. And that's what I experience with, with Jim. Very [emotes]. And I'm determined to play, and I'm giving myself three years to be ready for, to do "Othello." I mean, I'd be ready when Jim is, I think he's going to do Iago sooner or later. If I'm ready I might just get the part. If not, [laughs] I'll do it just the same. About to say it isn't just about getting the part. It's about having the experience it goes with. Yeah. Now, why is Othello in your opinion such a powerful play? Well, it's powerful drama. And here's a good man who, at the end, he, he takes his--he takes the blame upon himself. You know, he, it's classical drama and it's just hard for me to explain. But you see, before the advent of radio and TV movies, we had national companies all throughout, throughout the land. You had some of the mountainous men doing and such as Gilpin play these play, roles. Before him, Ira Aldridge-- Yeah, Ira Aldridge. Salvini. People that come here and play it in Italian and it's so powerful people just, just, just faint, fainted in the end of it. Just, just, just the emotions alone that there are several plays that I like, that I have done. I did a monosyllable role on Broadway, "The Hasty Heart." And that was powerful because he had to talk just emotional with no, no words. And that's always powerful. I guess I will have to say that whatever I'm doing, I, you know I fall right into that. But you are a powerful person. You're power person physically, you protect yourself powerfully in terms of your voice and your personality. One thing I frequently ask actors who I interview is: how much of the role that you play is role, and how much of it is you? Well that's a good question. I try to get lost into the, to the role, while I'm on the stage. While I'm on the stage. I give, I get into it completely and that is just being physically in shape. But when I'm off the stage I'm back to just plain, old Earl. [laughs] "Plain old Earl" isn't "plain old Earl." Plain old Earl is really a very wonderful person with many many dimensions and of course that's-- Fill my head. Go ahead. [laughs] That's one of the things about working with people in the Black cultural community: you find so many dimensions. Yeah. Yes. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Robert Earl Jones, distinguished actor. We've been talking about his roles, his reflections on Blacks in the theatre, and the power of the arts and interpreting the black experience. This is Roscoe Brown saying so long for "Soul of Reason." This program is produced by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University in association with NBC.

