Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:24.640
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that tells what's happening in Black America. Each week on NBC, leaders and movers in the Black community visit "Soul of Reason" to discuss important issues of concern to Blacks throughout the Americas. I'm your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, Adjunct Professor of Education at New York University, and President of Bronx Community College of the City University of New York. And with us this evening "Soul of Reason" is Dr. Hugh Butts, who's Director of the Bronx Psychiatric Center in New York City in the Bronx, and we're glad to have you with us tonight Hugh.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:00:57.041
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:58.031
Everyone talks about the Bronx, and I'm from Bronx, Bronx Community College. You're from Bronx, Bronx Psychiatric Center. I deal with education, you deal with mental health. What really is the nature of the mental health problem in the Bronx? Obviously it relates to education, it relates to everything that happens in the city. In a sense the Bronx becomes a symbol of some of the things that are wrong with New York City, but we're going to talk later on it's also a symbol of some of the things that are good about New York City.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:01:24.880
True. Well, the nature of the problem in terms of mental health in the Bronx, is to state it rather simply, the fact that the Bronx is the poorest of the five boroughs in New York City, and as a result of that degree of poverty and the various indices of social pathology, such as Aid to Dependent Children, welfare recipient see, Medicaid recipient see, unemployment et cetera, is the borough that's most in need of mental health resources and programs. And yet it's the very borough, that's receiving least of any of the boroughs. So there's an absurd paradox taking place, in that the people who are most vulnerable in the city of New York, the one and a half million people who live in the Bronx, who have some of the highest rates of unemployment in the state of New York, who have a per capita income of only twenty nine hundred dollars as contrasted with Manhattan, with a per capita income of fifty two hundred dollars, have very little by way of mental health resources. Now let me conquer ties that with some figures, and figures always give you a good idea as to what the issues are. Manhattan and the Bronx have practically identical populations that say one and a half million people. The per capita income in the Bronx is twenty nine hundred dollars. Manhattan has a per capita income of fifty two hundred dollars. There are approximately 170,000 families receiving Aid to Dependent Children in the Bronx, 94,000 families in Manhattan. Now I could go down each of the figures that indicate poverty and a very dependent population and that demonstrate that the Bronx is far in excess. But then when one looks at how the money is being allocated for mental health the state of New York itself is spending 18 dollars per capita in the Bronx for mental health, thirty five dollars per capita in the Bronx. Health and Hospital Corporation which funds the city municipal hospitals is expanding something like 16 million dollars in Manhattan, forty one million dollars in the Bronx. So the disparities are gross, and make no sense whatsoever. When I submit this kind of data, and this argument or plea, or whatever one chooses to call it to the people who do the planning for mental health, the only response that I get which seems rather ridiculous, is that historically this is the case and it will take eons to change it. I say it doesn't take eons to change anything if one has a commitment to do it all it requires is a shifting of resources from areas of affluence to areas of lack of affluence. But I think they the problem is much more pernicious than that. I think that the rich get richer and the poor get children, as the old aphorism goes. And Manhattan consists of people who are much more affluent, much more powerful, have much more access to legal power and other kinds of power and can get things done. I've never seen uncollected garbage on Sutton Place. You go down 138 Street between 7th and 8th Avenue, and you'll see loads of uncollected garbage because the people who live on Sutton Place have direct contact with the commissioner of sanitation and all they have to do is to get on the phone make a phone call and the garbage will be collected. So I think it's got to do with the fact that the Bronx is the first majority minority borough in the City of New York. Two thirds of the residents are Black and Hispanic and Blacks and Hispanics are quote "not entitled to adequate mental health care, or health care, or educational care." The same thing applies in every realm of human services in the Bronx. And I think it's a consciously, sometimes unconsciously ,but for the most part consciously thought out mechanism for depriving a group that has already been deprived.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:30.352
Of course you put it quite well and quite clearly. Your institution, your organization, --let's use the term organization- the Bronx Psychiatric Center, is part of the New York state mental health system. And a number of things have happened in mental health, and the resources that you receive for Bronx Psychiatric are in fact a function of the political power system in the way in which the resources allocated. The consequence of this disparity is very great. For example, in the Bronx we have a tremendous number of abandoned buildings, abandoned blocks, a tremendous number of arsons. The arsonists not caught, and if they're caught they're not appropriately prosecuted. The education system has significant problems in terms of being able to keep students in school, being able to keep their number of teachers to the appropriate level. All of this relates to a massive social and economic change in the Bronx. One question I've always asked myself, is that if this change were not accompanied by an influx of minority residents, would in fact, the Bronx be as bad off, as badly off as it is. And the answer I come up with is no. I think that- ah- as you say, the fact that a large number of powerless people, and in this instance powerless people many of whom are bilingual many of whom are even monolingual and non English speaking, which limits again their power, plus the massive exodus of small labor intensive industry which is now not the Koran and not appropriate for the type of labor market that we have in New York City. Brings about a tremendous problem which then makes what's happened in the Bronx, particularly South Bronx as prototypical of what could happen to any city in America, where the people who grew up in those cities are people who benefited economically from those cities now leave. And then we have these big populations, large population of literally new people. In New York City alone, [coughs] it's estimated that the population of the city has sort of turned over about a half. In other words, over the past 20 25 years about half of the people ,who are New York City now are new people, and these new people are mostly blacks and browns. Not all of them poor, but many of them poor. Which brings about a whole series of new problems and of course mental health problems in my opinion, really do come about when people can't meet the basic necessities of life, of food, clothing, protection, warmth, shelter. And then they begin to feast on each other, and all of the various problems that come about from that type of interaction create these very violent acting out or in other instance extremely passive and withdrawn behavior, which you have to deal with.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:08:44.081
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:44.371
And your organization has to deal with.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:08:45.921
You've really said, if you pardon the pun, a mouthful because to deal just with the business situation there are an estimated, one hundred and ninety, two thousand small businesses in New York City in 1976. Of those, only seventeen thousand are located in the Bronx. So there's been a an exodus, and an increasing paucity of business in the borough. In addition, the unemployment in the borough has increased. So it's an extremely deprived area that is not only being burned out, but does not have the facilities to provide the wherewithal for its residents. Now in terms of my facility, we are the major provider of mental health services in the borough. Again to deal in comparisons which are very revealing. Manhattan and the Bronx almost identical populations. My hospital has approximately 750 beds, Manhattan State Hospital has fifteen hundred beds, twice as many. There are close to fourteen hundred municipal and voluntary psychiatric beds in Manhattan. There are 193 municipal involuntary psychiatric beds in the Bronx, so that there are a total of three thousand psychiatric beds in Manhattan, and 900 psychiatric beds in the Bronx. This is a gross inequity nobody in the world can justify that to me. And at the same time, my very institution for the four and a half to almost five years that I've been there, has been progressively decimated every year. So we've had reductions in funding, and employee levels, so that when I arrived in 1974, we had fourteen hundred and forty employees. We are now teetering at eleven hundred and sixty three, which means that we have lost 300 employees. Meanwhile we've been called upon to do more by way of admitting more patients, having more patients in the institution. So fewer people are being called upon to do more work, and the institution is on the brink of disaster. And I think the Bronx is on the brink of disaster.

Dr. Roscoe 00:10:57.380
Now is this decline in employees due in part to the trend on the part of the State Department mental hygiene to deinstitutionalize, this has been a big issue. It's been in the press, it's been with the legislature and I'm sure many in the audience know that no longer do we really have -the ver- a lot of the very very large hospitals where people who are mentally ill were put there and required to stay there in fact sometimes for their entire lives. And because of what was then deemed to be an extremely expensive operation, and the fact many psychologists, probably people like yourself, said that many of these patient did not need to be in a large institution of confinement. They began a whole move toward deinstitutionalization. And then reducing the payrolls, concomitantly, reducing the number of beds. This has led to another set of scandals, and even though many of these patients -can- do not require institutionalization of close confinement, they do require some help. And when they get out into the community many of them do not have families, or their families do not accept them, and they end up in what now gets to be they call them welfare hotels or sorrows and SROs or whatever they happen to call them. And in some places, Long Beach on Long Island being probably the most prominent West Side that's been a tremendously larger number of these kind of people going into these rooming houses, walking the streets, causing minor problems, sometimes major problems. So that gives us another part of it. So before we get into the deinsititutionalization, I just wanted to identify what are some of the actual mental health problems of the people in the Bronx that you face? Are they the more complicated things that where people just they say flake out, or are they the type of things where people just really become unable to deal with the environment and just sort of pull away from it? Well know

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:13:04.412
We are dealing with severely mentally disabled people, the majority of whom are grossly psychotic. The most frequent diagnostic label is schizophrenia which accounts for the majority of our patients, and we have established certain criteria for admission so that a patient must be suicidal, homicidal, or so grossly disorganized, that he cannot fend for himself in the community. So we are admitting patients who are extremely and chronically disturbed who need care. We're not admitting neurotic housewives, who nip a little bit too much, and can't deal with the pressures of day to day life. We're dealing with a chronic population, and a very disturbed population. The whole thrust for deinstitutionalization was quite salutary at its inception, and had in mind providing the least restrictive setting for patients and converting many of our warehouses which is what they were, like Pilgrim and Islip, the big places on the island into more humane settings where patients could receive more adequate care. As with many things that are done by some of our planners who are extremely shortsighted, this was not planned adequately at all. The rundowns and populations of the institutions, was established as taking place and programmed and planned for. But the concomitant shift of monies to the communities in order to receive those patients was never accomplished, so the patients left the institutions, went to the communities, found no services there and wandered eating out of garbage cans. And that's the situation we're faced with now in sections of Queens and Manhattan, the West Side of Manhattan.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:50.871
Usually there are places that are somewhat close to the institutions where they were.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:14:56.011
That's right. Not that far away.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:57.562
Not that far away, or they are in areas where there is an available supply of housing which is fairly close to some central transportation point, so that these people go there somewhere close to their, their basic parent community,

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:15:13.321
And congregate there.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:15:14.790
Now if there's one thing that we have never been accused of in the Bronx it's dumping, because frankly- there is -we wouldn't do it to begin with because they might find it repugnant,

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:23.751
And there's no place to dump.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:15:23.758
And there's no place to dump because most of the borough has been burned out, and the other part is being put to the torch rapidly. But [ah- pauses]our basic tenet and credo has been that we at Bronx psychiatric believe that patients should receive sensitive care devoted to their needs for whatever period of time they need it.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:15:46.980
Now one of the results of this has been that our length of stay of our period as patients, has increased from approximately 20 days to 49 days. We've been criticized for that increase, and I have said no, that that's a spurious kind of criticism, because I can demonstrate that we render better care to people by keeping them a little longer, and we intend to continue doing that. The only way in which we will modify that length of stay is if there are certain logistic factors that we can control, but we will never compromise with -adequate- adequacy of patient care. So I think the whole deinstitutionalization thrust has not been thought out as well as it might, and is doomed to the same kind of failure that the community mental health center movement was doomed to in the 60s.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:33.340
Tonight on "Soul of Reason" we are talking with Dr. Hugh Butts who's Director of the Bronx Psychiatric Center. And we're talking about the very serious problems that we face in the Bronx not only mental health, but in economic development, education, and the like. And speaking of the Bronx, Hugh, one of the things that I frequently do as we talk about the Bronx, is to try to remove that veil of hopelessness that many people, beginning with Mr. Carter, our president and sometimes our mayor, have draped over the Bronx. True enough, the abandonment of houses, the high rate of unemployment, the problems of mental health in schools exist in the Bronx and certainly the often. On the other hand the Bronx is a borough that has some of our finest cultural institutions, some of our finest universities, Fordham University, Manhattan College, Bronx Community College, Lehman College. It is a borough that has the most beautiful Bronx Botanical Gardens, the Bronx Zoological Gardens, -just- and of course New York Yankees with all their problems. Similarly it has some excellent housing, has a big problem that we have in the Bronx is to turnaround this aura of hopelessness, to stabilize in many communities like the communities in the West Bronx and the Fordham Hill area and so on. Stabilize those areas and then begin to get this massive inflow of money, of both private money and federal money. I happen to be one who believes that the -private- the public sector should do a lot, a tremendous amount. But I also believe that you cannot in our society save any community, without massive influx of private money, which means we've got to stop the redlining, we've got to stop the deinvestment by the banks which is something Borough President, Bob Abrams has been talking about. We've got to get these more technologically oriented industries to come to the Bronx to begin to build on a labor pool which can be trained. There are very very few things that even modern technology requires that if you can't teach people to read and count, that they can't do. And on our end at Bronx Community College and now this is one thing we're trying to do and I know the other education institutions are trying to do, including the high schools. exam has some excellent high school. We have a large high school in the country D with Clinton with all of their fantastic accomplishments. We have Kennedy High School. We have done is, we have a large number of very good institutions, but the problem is that we are always fighting that battle as you are, between the effect of these mental health and economic and education problems on trying to keep the system going. So at the same time as you are trying to meet the challenges your budgets are being cut, you're having this kind of problem. So I think that what those of us who work and live in the Bronx and care about the Bronx, and what the city have to do is to begin to remove this veil of hopelessness. The Bronx is not going to be burned up. [DHB agrees] The Bronx is going to survive and it is going to be a better place because of the type of thing that people like you and I and all of the other social and business leaders are going to try to do.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:19:51.150
I share your optimism. I think it's a fantastic borough last Sunday in fact I went to the botanical garden and spent a couple hours. It's an amazing place. The borough abounds in history. I think the the multi-ethnicity of the borough is in itself one of its strengths that must not be overlooked. And it abounds in educational and other kinds of human service facilities that are, very salutary in terms of their charge. And I think it can be reclaimed. It's going to take an infusion of a great deal of money. I learned yesterday by the way, that HUD has appropriated 18 million dollars for housing for mentally disabled patients in 14 states, one of which is to be in New York state by the way. I would hope that the Bronx gets a share of that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:36.291
Because you got to do more and hope you have a good idea that the political mechanisms operate in such a way as to see that that happens. That really is the key to.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:20:46.261
Of course.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:47.071
Now going back to the mental health problem, particularly the whole question of how do we promote good mental health. We've talked about intervening at a time when people have gotten into problems, and I think the fact that schizophrenia which is really extreme aberrations are variations in behavior, and reactions to various crisis situations tends to be the most significant problem. The most prominent problem. That really reflects that people, the fact that people are responding to all the tensions that they are faced with. Where are they going to live? What's going to happen when their husband leaves? What are they going to do- for- to pay the rent? What are they going to eat? What are they gonna do with Johnny who gets in trouble? These are the kinds of things that press on people. So as a psychiatrist, and as the Director of the largest psychiatric facility in the Bronx, what do you think we can do to begin to turn things in the direction of positive mental health?

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:21:45.210
It sounds so simple that I feel embarrassed to say it, but, prevention is the answer. I see very few programs aimed or designed to prevent mental illness. We have one such program at our hospital called a P.A.C.E. Unit, stands for parent and child education. And if I can get a plug in on the Today Show tomorrow morning at 8 o'clock, the unit chief of that service, Dr. Carolyn Goodman, will be describing the program. Well this would have been aired after that took place. In any event this program takes-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:18.202
You did get on a today show. [laughter]

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:22:21.271
This program takes mothers who are schizophrenic and hospitalized, and buses their children into the hospital many of whom are toddlers, to spend the day with their mothers. And in a supervisory kind of manner, so that staff is present to assist mother in the mothering function. [pauses]

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:22:39.570
It's a preventive program and that these are children who are high risk themselves of becoming schizophrenic one day by virtue of having had a schizophrenic mother. We've already seen evidence of a lower incidence in this population, and I'm sure we will continue to see continued evidence of a lowered incidence. It's the only such program I know of in the state of New York. Why aren't there 500 such programs? Why doesn't each psychiatric center have such a program? The president's commission has placed as one of its mandates and higher priorities prevention. And I think we've got to engage in a massive job of prevention.

Dr. Roscoe 00:23:15.410
Well what do you do when these youngsters come? I didn't.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:23:18.331
Well they come-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:19.361
Didn't get the actual picture in terms of -act- what happens when they get there?

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:23:22.710
They come to the hospital. Their mothers leaves the wards, and come down to a center that we've designated as the P.A.C.E. Center. The mothers interact with their children. They may play with them. They may address them. They may change them if they're in diapers. They will certainly feed them. Teachers are there to teach them. Mothers participate in the teaching process. Mothers as a result of this learn how to relate to their children in such a manner as to diminish some of the, noxious factors that lead to disruptive behavior or schizophrenic behavior. Mothers learn to be non-schizophrenic mothers, and children learn to relate to non-schizophrenic mothers. That's kind of the essence of what happens.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:06.871
As you say this, is almost like that old adage that parents have to be taught how to be parents.

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:24:12.120
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:13.122
The main -the mental health problems that we have in the society. do have to do with the way in which those of us learn from our parents, and teach our children and so on. However the very serious problems you're talking about, come, both from and by severe environmental stress. And I believe some research begins to talk about certain biological predispositions. What is your feeling on that?

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:24:37.410
I think it's an issue that that, is significant. I've never been absolutely convinced as to the degree of the significance. I think there is a biological, I believe there's a biological predisposition to schizophrenia, which is enhanced or reinforced by certain [pauses] external kinds of factors. In other words, if you take the genetic predisposition and combine it with the environmental stresses you have someone who may become schizophrenic. But I think one has to be very cautious in terms of weighting that and evaluating it, because otherwise one may take the position all schizophrenics are genetically that way nothing can be done. And I think one has to weigh and evaluate the extent to which the genetic and the environmental factors come together.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:27.901
How crucial is age? How crucial is any particular time period in a person's life span when they're apt to get at that turning point where certain clusters of biological and cultural factors will cause them to be mentally sick and act out, and if they can pass that they'll be fairly, so-called stable people rest of their lives?

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:25:52.890
Well unfortunately there's there's no age that's immune. The late teens, and that's why the term Dementia praecox, dementia, mental illness, praecox, puberty came about. It was believed to be a disease of pubescents, that is adolescence. It's not quite, but many schizophrenics begin to manifest their symptoms during early or late adolescence which is a very traumatic period anyway. If they get through that period, many other schizophrenics especially the paranoid types, begin to manifest symptoms in the 20s and 30s. If they get through that period, some people will begin to have what we call involutional symptoms as certain endocrine changes take place in the body, and affect the psychic functioning of a person. They may develop what's known as an involutional melancholia. Many of us, including myself I assume, by the time I reach 85 or 90, and some of my blood vessels begin to close down, will begin to experience senile changes and become a little forgetful, and not quite remember where I am at times. So, no age period is really sacrosanct or-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:05.011
In other words you can run but you can't hide

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:27:06.841
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:07.920
And of course that points up the need for eternal vigilance in mental health services. Now we've talked about a very serious situation in the Bronx, but obviously you can take that and spread that throughout the city, throughout the nation, and you have an assessment of the mental health problem in general, and then we add to it the question of minorities, the question of the Black experience. To what extent does that exacerbate or multiply these factors?

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:27:36.660
There are two epidemiologists, Elma Strewning and Judith Rabkin at Psychiatric Institute who've done a fantastic study entitled "Ethnicity, Social Class, and Mental Illness." They make a beautiful correlation between minority status and mental illness. The fact that Blacks, Hispanics, and other minorities in this country are infinitely more vulnerable to mental disability, than members of the majority groups. Not because they are minority people, but because of the conditions of life, the stresses, the deprivations, the humiliations to which they are subjected because of their minority status.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:12.870
Well is there anything -because we've heard this- on any, on this radio program and throughout- the- Black America has heard this. Is anything that we as Blacks can do to help protect ourselves, to help give us that extra, that'll keep this from happening to us as much as it has in the past?

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:28:29.940
Aside from the very global things in terms of fighting for legislation, money that will improve housing and the very conditions of life. Aside from the somewhat utopian and maybe quixotic approach that as a nation our value system has got to change, and we've got to put less money into hardware on Mars, and more money into human services. It becomes a personal kind of thing-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:55.142
What about strengthening the black family and the extended Black family?

Dr. Hugh Butts 00:28:59.640
I believe that that has to be done. And that becomes an almost individual kind of thing in that each person has to struggle with his own family with whatever network of assistance he can derive from his community to strengthen the family when it can be done. Enhance those trends that exist, identify them first of all because they are fantastic, and then draw upon the community network and system that can be of help in enabling those families to survive and thrive.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:29:29.970
Okay. And with people like Dr. Hugh Butts helping us to pull this together, I think our society will improve, and certainly we have some problems that we have to deal with. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Doctor Hugh Butts he's Director of the Bronx Psychiatric Center, and we've been discussing the mental health problem in the Bronx and in New York City. This is Roscoe Brown saying so long for "Soul of Reason." This program is produced by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University in association with NBC.

