Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:02.31.000000000000227
Several recently published books about the life of Blacks doing slavery have created much heated discussion. One of these controversial books, "Roll Jordan Roll" by Eugene Genovese, will be discussed by Professors Eric Perkins and Eric Foner on tonight's "Soul of Reason". This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the B lack thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:01:05.550
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" are two professors: Professor William Eric Perkins of Temple University, and Professor Eric Foner of City College of the City University of New York who is now visiting at Princeton University. And we're going to be talking about Eugene Genovese's book "Roll Jordan Roll". So to get us started, Eric Foner, could you sort of briefly outline Genovese's thesis in "Roll Jordan Roll".

Eric Foner 00:01:32.121
Okay well it's a rather lengthy and complicated book, but to summarize it: Genovese, I think, is arguing that you cannot understand the life of the slaves under slavery without understanding the planter class and vice versa. In other words that there was a continuing interaction between planters and slaves. And he argues that the life of the slaves was basically determined by a system which he calls paternalism that is that the the planter class treated the slaves, and in fact everyone in the South, as if they were part of a kind of large extended family, and that the slaves accepted this system and turned it to their own advantage. They took the the system of paternalism, they used it to establish certain rights under the slave system -- a certain leeway, breathing space for themselves. But that, and that enabled them to survive the institution of slavery with a sense of dignity, a sense of their own worth and not to just succumb to the most brutalizing aspects of slavery. But at the same time by accepting the system they, they could not really attack it. They could not really rebel or create an alternative to the slave system and that this is why there were rather few slave rebellions in the South and why the system existed for as long as it did. So, it's something gets complicated

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:02:58.531
general introduction. Of course this tends to follow along something that was initiated in Fogel and Engerman's book "Time on the Cross". It really says something -- it's an affront to Black people, I guess an affront to people who believe in freedom all over the world -- that this form of oppression which was man's probably most brutal form of oppression, slavery, selling people and so on, really wasn't so bad and the Blacks who were under this more or less internalized some of the values of the masters. Now Eric Perkins, one of the concepts that Genovese uses is the concept of "planter hegemony". What is this concept and is it a valid concept?

William Eric Perkins 00:03:38.580
Well Genovese's use of the concept of hegemony, is: he uses this concept to establish the domination of the planter class hegemony in the sense that the planters held the complete social, political, economic, and cultural domination of the South. Not only of the Black population, the slave and free Black population, but also of the poorer whites. And he uses this concept to establish the domination of this class and without a doubt it is a, this has been one of Genovese's great contributions to American history is introducing this concept that is "how do ruling classes come to rule?". And it has been very useful and not fully absorbed I don't think by the majority of American historians. Now, to the extent that this is a valid assumption I would raise many questions about its use and that is, did the slaves actually -- I would pose the question this way -- did the slaves actually internalize this system of planter domination in their, the rules for behavior established by the planters and so forth?This is the question I think that we must address ourselves to.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:04:48.060
Now, I know that as a Marxist historian Genovese has looked at the relationship between the ruling class and the working class and would project an analysis of slavery in this way. And I believe you, Eric Foner, had mentioned in some of your writing that you thought this was a very, very significant contribution to history, that possibly Genovese was one of the first Marxist historians to really clearly point up that slavery did have some relationship to the old capitalist exploitation that we've been talking about for so many years. Could you comment on that? Well, yes. I think Genovese, as Eric Perkins said, has made some important contributions despite the limitations of his work and the problems with it. He is one of the most creative Marxist historians working today, emphasizing the class nature of slavery -- that is to say that it's a system where, you know, one class of people is doing the work and another class owns all the means of production, the property -- that seems to be fairly obvious. But many historians have not really dealt with it in that way. They, many historians have emphasized the sort of racial aspect of slavery which of course is very important, and in fact Genovese has been criticized for downplaying it, for not really giving enough attention to racism as a dominant element in the Old South. But on the other hand, many historians who just emphasized racism have not really given enough attention to the class nature of slavery and to the way slavery works as an exploitative labor system and after all that's why it began. I mean slavery began not because Black, Black people were Black but because their labor was needed in the fields. So the origin of it is, you know, in a system of labor even though racism then develops as a ideology to sort of support the system and to prevent people from attacking it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:06:46.880
However, under an oppressive system there is a belief that the masses will finally become discontent enough with their situation and rise up and overthrow the ruling class. And Genovese, if I read him correctly, is saying that Massa was happy, Massa made the slaves happy on the old plantation and they didn't want to do anything. And I think Eric Perkins, you tend to disagree with that particular interpretation.

William Eric Perkins 00:07:12.913
Well what Genovese has done I think, is he -- with the use of the concept of hegemony -- he tries to show how any kind of discontent or dissent was minimized in the South. That the planters had in fact created a web around the slaves and that they what little living space the slaves did acquire was again determined by the planters. So that for example, in his analysis of religion, a big section of the book, he attempts to show how the slaves, this was an important part of slave culture. But that religion itself could not develop the appropriate ideology which would have led to an overthrow of the slave regime. It was limited by the fact that the slaves shared their religion and religious styles and so forth with that of the white planters being of course, both being Protestant groups.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:08:06.711
Well that's consistent with Marx's "opiate of the masses".

William Eric Perkins 00:08:09.861
I would agree with that wholeheartedly. That is, that I don't think that for the slaves that religion in itself would have been the ideology that would have led to an overthrow of the system. This is -- religion does suffer from various limitations. Its otherworldliness in fact prevents it from being a more secular kind of ideology.

Eric Foner 00:08:31.161
Although on the other hand, we also know that some of the rebel slaves were deeply influenced by religion. After all Nat Turner was a preache, Gabriel Prosser was deeply influenced by the Bible, Denmark Vesey... so that religion, you know in general I agree with you but on some some points it can serve to inspire people to rebel.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:08:51.070
So that's the reason why, when someone like Eric Foner says this is more of a class situation and a race situation, I don't know whether you really meant that. But earlier you tended to suggest that that is a very good interpretation of slavery in terms of the relationship between the ruling class and the working class. The key fact however is race. The key fact is that Black people were oppressed. The key fact is that Black people were brought away from their basic native culture in Africa. Their cultural tools were taken away from them and then a very vicious form of apartheid, separation of Blacks and whites, were developed. And in one sense the religion, basically the Christian religion which taught them to read and write and gave them these codes -- "Steal Away", you know, the spirituals -- to really begin to communicate among themselves between plantations, between slaves, might well have been something that enabled them to gain the strength and sustain themselves. And what at least popularly we have been taught to believe was a very brutal environment, of course Genovese and Fogel and Engerman tend to say may not have been as brutal as the popular stereotypes of slavery have been. Those of us who are Black and can just see oppression regardless of where it comes even here in 1976, are a little bit concerned about that interpretation. So how do you bring those two things together. How do you bring together the fact that yes, it was a class exploitation but it was also a form of the most brutal racist oppression that man has ever known?

Eric Foner 00:10:24.560
Well that is exactly the question that historians have to answer and I don't think anyone has given a full answer to it. Nobody. Certainly I would not argue that slavery is simply a class system and the racial element is obviously very dominant. On the other hand, slavery is a labor system and has to be understood in those terms also. And moreover, slavery was part of the whole world capitalist economy. After all, where was the cotton going to? It was going to the industrial, you know the industrial factories of England and the North. If it hadn't been for the Industrial Revolution, for the demand for cotton for the textile mills, slavery would not have been as powerful as it was. So slavery cannot be understood outside of the whole world capitalist system of which it is a part. On the other hand it's a special part and it needs to be analyzed specially because it is also a system of racial oppression. We have to merge those two things.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:11:19.950
One of the beautiful things that has come out of the Black Revolution is the fact that those of us who are Black can talk about something that is very painful to us and at least begin to put some analysis on it. The problem some people talk about is paralysis from over analysis, and it keeps us from really getting into challenging even the racist systems that exist today. But there's some validity of course in looking at what had happened in the past. Well Professor Perkins, what about regional differences in slavery? I get the impression that Genovese, as he writes, sort of paints a broad brush.That slavery was slavery. And from my reading I know of a number of differences, particularly between the Eastern coastal slavery and the so-called Black Belt slavery, the Delta slavery. What about that?

William Eric Perkins 00:12:05.401
Well Genovese, I think in his "Roll Jordan Roll", is he takes as his norm the large plantations of the South, usually with 50 or more slaves in large units of land. And these areas were located predominantly on the South Atlantic states, Tidewater Virginia, Lowcountry South Carolina and the Black Belt states of Alabama and Mississippi. And this is where, the majority of his analysis is focused around these states so that he minimizes, I think, the very important regional differences within slavery. For example, the South -- the regional differences in the South have made for unique economic configurations. Northern Alabama and Mississippi, for example, were regions where there were very few slaves and a large white farming class. Genovese here I don't think has given enough evidence or presented enough evidence to show how these farming elements, these regions of the South that were given over to small farms and small slave holders, what impact they had on the slave system in terms of minimizing planter control or planter authority. These are questions I think also that have not been sufficiently or adequately dealt with in American history to this date. The regional differences of slavery and so forth. Differences between the upper and the lower South, for example.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:13:26.550
Well in a sense, Eric Foner, do you think that examination of conditions of Blacks and slavery will also help us to examine changes in the South today?

Eric Foner 00:13:36.390
Oh I certainly think so. After all this is, you know, this is the origin of present day society and many of the racial attitudes and other attitudes of which are prevalent in America today were formed during the slavery period. That's why it's so important to study it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:13:52.861
We're talking this evening with Professor William Eric Perkins of Temple University and Professor Eric Foner of City College, discussing Genovese's book "Roll Jordan Roll". Now, building on what we were talking about just a moment ago -- in terms of the attitudes in the contemporary South growing out of attitudes that had been developed and bad behavior patterns that have been developed during slavery -- one of the points that I've heard frequently is that interracial relationships between Blacks and whites will progress much more smoothly in the South and the North once we get over the legal discrimination and the barriers. And part of the view there is that there are certain basic communal living patterns and attitudes that were developed out of the relationships during slavery. And Genovese does talk about the fact that slaves had the opportunity to have some living space and to develop their own attitudes within this general hegemony that the planters had established. Eric Perkins, could you discuss that a little bit? Give us a little light on that particular point.

William Eric Perkins 00:14:58.410
Well what Genovese does, I think, is, the paternal ideology first of all created the basis for establishing the control of the planters. Now, he establishes this first by the question of treatment. That is that the slaves -- on the one hand, the paternalist system was, could be brutal could be punishing and so forth. But on the other hand, many masters had, as he calls it, that slavery was "a duty and a burden". They had these obligations to their slaves: obligations for decent food, decent clothing et cetera, decent medical care for those that were sick and so forth. So what Genovese does is establish, as he says, that slaves were, (similar to Fogel and Engerman), that slaves were pretty well treated. Now from this, from this point of treatment, he then goes on to show how the planters then begin to assert their authority and control. First of all that the, for example when he talks about work relations, or the work routines on the plantation, he argues how the slaves and the masters had to hammer this out and that the master eventually won. On family relations, for example, Genovese...

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:16:10.200
Now hold on. That's a very good point. You said that the slaves and the master had to hammer it out and the master eventually won. Now, in my somewhat simplistic analysis they won because they use force -- brutal force -- and they separated families, did things like that. Now what did Genovese really mean when he said they won? And how did they win?

William Eric Perkins 00:16:28.620
Well Genovese argues that slaves came from a pre-industrial culture in which they were not used -- accustomed -- to rigorous, day-to-day kind of work and because of this the slaves, as a preindustrial people they kind of work when they felt like it. It came from cultures in which this was so. Genovese argues the planter didn't want this kind of system to prevail because it was very unproductive and inefficient. So the slaves and the masters had to argue and work out, as he says, they had to hammer out a compromise on what work was to be done on the plantations. Now my reading of this is that it seems to indicate that the slaves had some choice in this matter, and I would say that my own reading of this, is that Genovese just minimizes the extent to which the planters did extract this labor forcefully.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:17:19.230
Well let's, for the benefit of our listening audience, deal with how a historian arrives at a conclusion like that. Engerman and Fogel came out with this book "Time on the Cross". They did an econometric analysis using data about populations and numbers of slaves on some kind of plantations, and amount of work that was done, and they came out with somewhat similar conclusion in the sense that the slaves had accommodated to a work pattern that the masters had established. Almost like a B.F. Skinner conditioning -- "you get so much food, they do so much work" kind of thing. Now given the paucity of data and the fact we didn't have motion pictures and tape recorders and so on, how do we arrive at that? I happen to know myself but I think for the purpose of our audience it might be interesting to just explore how a historian goes about getting the information from which he makes such conclusions.

Eric Foner 00:18:16.560
Well the fact is, as you know Roscoe, that historians come to the evidence with certain ideas and preconceptions and interpretations about what is important. Now Fogel and Engerman, there are similarities between them and Genovese, but it's important to point out there are differences too.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:18:33.241
That's correct.

Eric Foner 00:18:33.811
Fogel and Engerman make the slaves almost completely without any independence.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:18:39.080
Right.

Eric Foner 00:18:39.291
In other words everything is determined by the planter, the slaves become really perfect slaves from the point of machines.

00:18:44.642
Automatons.

Eric Foner 00:18:46.171
It's like a little factory of the slaves are -- it's not only -- they're really made over in the image of the planter and they become quite as active in the system and they see their interests identify with the system just like the planters do. Now Genovese, who comes from a different point of view, sees slavery as a struggle, as, as, as Eric Perkins said there is a kind of hammering out. On the other hand, the masters usually win. Now he sees this is happening because of this ideological hegemony or the paternalism, that the slaves sort of accept the legitimacy of the planter's domination and therefore they can't, they can't really resist. He doesn't really emphasize force as Eric Perkins said. On the other hand, unlike Fogler and Engerman he does give a lot of credence to the fact that the slaves really didn't accept slavery as being a positive good even though they didn't see themselves as having any alternative to it, and also that there was this compromise. In other words everything wasn't determined by the master. There had to be a give and take and the slaves could get some of their own way, even within a limited area.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:19:52.860
As you were mentioning this, recently we've seen "Gone With the Wind" on television and you could see how the slaves sort of identified with the needs of the master of the planter class. Now some other people who would like to interpret Black history say that really isn't true and of course they point to the role of Prosser and Vesey and Turner and so on. To what extent, Eric Perkins, does Genovese deal with the attempts of slaves to throw off their oppression by force.

William Eric Perkins 00:20:26.972
Well in "Roll Jordan Roll" he left out the section of the book promising a future analysis of slave revolts. Toward the end of the book he leaves off, more or less, the question of slave rebellion and slave revolution, pointing out for example that it was absent, virtually absent, in the United States and of course very predominant in the Caribbean and in South America. Now Genovese does promise us a future analysis of slave revolts -- hopefully pretty soon. But again he hasn't adequately dealt with this question, at least in "Roll Jordan Roll". However if we do follow the argument and the point of view that Genovese has adopted now for over a decade, we will find that again, this ideological domination, this paternalism, limits the extent to which slaves might revolt. And so we could expect at least that that would be the analysis forthcoming in his study of slave rebellions and slave insurrections in the Old South.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:21:27.270
Eric Perkins let me ask you a direct question. What do you think? Because as a black man I really feel badly thinking that my folks sort of became willing partners in my oppression. On the other hand much of what I've been taught -- and we admit that what we've been taught may really have been distorted -- tends to support this. And in a sense whereas Genovese's book throws a little light on our independence, it does tend to suggest that yes we did sort of assimilate and acculturate. What do you think? I know it's a hard question to answer and if at this point in your development you feel you don't really know enough to answer it you can say that.

William Eric Perkins 00:22:06.770
Well I feel that again, Genovese's analysis has, has at least established some new terrain on which historians can move and ask further questions and make future studies and so forth. But my understanding of slavery and the reading and so forth that I've done in it would lead me to, I would say, opposite conclusions and that that is that the slaves developed a culture of their own very much that was invisible, to use the old Ellisonian term that still has not been absorbed. We were invisible. The culture that the slaves developed was invisible to that of the masters. We can see this in many cases. For example you mentioned "Gone With The Wind" but the collapse of slavery was -- there was no more traumatic experience for the old Southern ruling class than to see their most faithful and loyal. How about absconding or picking up a gun. Joining the Union army and so forth. This led to a complete demolition of the paternal system so I would argue that the slaves, in fact, that the culture that they did develop was -- it developed in response to the fact that the planters had authority. But this culture is in no way imitative of, of the culture of the planters. Now in one of the new books out, Professor government's book, for example, argues that the slaves -- their marriage relations, for example, slaves married outside of the group whereas planters married inside the group. That fact, that cardinal fact, is enough to establish a difference between the planter culture and the slave culture.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:23:44.860
Now Eric Foner, you said something that is very clear to those of us who are academicians and that is an academician never really approaches something with a completely blank mind. You approach it in terms of your particular theories, what you've studied, what you believe. And one of the things that I'm sure you as a white historian studying Black affairs would run into is the fact that some Black people say white people shouldn't study Blacks or they bring a particular bias to it. Now the Marxist tradition which I believe you tend to identify with is one which allegedly places class ahead of race. Those of us who are Black would tend to feel, particularly in America, that race is ahead of class. How has this influenced your own work, your own interpretation, for example of Genovese?

Eric Foner 00:24:29.570
Well as I said before I think what we're trying to do is come up with a new interpretation relevant to America and to the Black experience in America. I think, you know, yes I do come out of the Marxist tradition but I'm not wedded to it as a kind of bible and you know just go back and say, "well Marx said this and therefore this has to be true". It's a, it's a method, it's an approach and it's a kind of means of analysis and you know what we're trying to do is come up with some way of welding these two things. But let me add one other point related to this which is important. Vis-à-vis Genovese: Genovese makes very clear that you can't understand one class except in relation to another class. In other words you can't understand the slaves except in relation to the planters and vice versa. However there is one very important class which is sort of left out, not only here but in most of the studies of slavery and that is the non-slave holding whites and that is the majority of the white population in the South. Most white Southerners did not own slaves and until we really understand those people and what their relationship to slavery was and what their relationship to Blacks was and to the white planters, we really won't have a full picture of the South. I mean after all, you know, last month in the election we had the descendants of the rednecks and the descendants of the slaves voting together for Carter for whatever reasons. That shows that you know perhaps neither of those groups is completely as dominated in their political outlook as, you know, as some people might think.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:26:01.250
Well one of the things that is interesting when you read these treatises about slavery is that much of the data are based on large plantations. Yet a large number of the slaves worked on small units. Now what does this do to your data when you develop an analysis in one particular pattern and another particular pattern might be equally appropriate.

Eric Foner 00:26:24.140
It's difficult. This is one of the big problems. The fact is that the big planters kept records which are very available to historians. The small farmer, the small planter, the guy who owned one or two slaves didn't keep records usually. And so this tends to bias the historian's judgement. He goes to where the information is available. But we, I don't even know. We cannot really begin-- until the research is done on the small slave holder and the non-slave holder we really won't know a full, we won't have a full picture of the Old South and then we won't have a, and because of that we won't have a full picture of Blacks either.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:26:57.920
I think that's an excellent point. Eric Perkins, briefly what has been the value of the slave narratives to the historian. They are awesome narratives, were taken in the 30s from former slaves. What has been the value of those?

William Eric Perkins 00:27:09.680
I think that to a great extent they will allow us in a, in certain ways, to begin to reconstruct the interior texture of experience among the great masses, particularly the great masses of field hands and I think that this is very valuable and very rewarding now. But the point about the narratives was, some people, for example, would want to use them as the sole evidentiary base for the study of slavery. And by no means is this possible because they have certain biases. The slaves, for example, interviewed during the Depression we can, for example, learn a great deal about the poverty of the Depression from the recollections of these old timers in addition to learning about the, you know, the interior world of slavery and we must remember for example that in the slave narratives a great many of these people were children at the time. Their memories are being recorded.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:28:02.330
I think that this discussion is really right on in terms of what historians ought to be doing in examining the Black experience, the Black experience during slavery; as Eric Foner said the Black experience in the South, hopefully with more data about the non- slave holding whites and also its relationship to what might be happening in Black America today. Our guests on tonight's"Soul of Reason" have been Professor William Eric Perkins of Temple University and Professor Eric Foner of City College, discussing Eugene Genovese's book "Roll Jordan Roll".

