Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.260
Black dance companies are flourishing throughout the nation. Hear Rod Rodgers, Director of the Rod Rodgers Dance Company, discuss the role of Black dance companies in the artistic life of America, on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:34.821
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:01.611
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Rod Rodgers, who is a choreographer, dancer, uh, director and founder of the Rod Rodgers Dance Company, and we're really glad to have you with us tonight to talk about dance, although quite honestly, I'd like to see some.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and Rod Rodgers 00:01:15.173
[laughter]

Rod Rodgers 00:01:17.991
That would be the best way to present it. But there are great--many aspects of the dance to be discussed that a lot of people seem to miss just in the seeing.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:26.210
And one of the things we try to do on "Soul of Reason," as we reflect the various facets of Black life, is to highlight the role of our arts, in developing and projecting our culture and our concerns. And we've had, musicians, jazz musicians, we've had writers, we've had playwrights, we've had poets, and we've had dancers in the past, and--particularly now in America--it looks like Black dancers are all over the place. And as I look at your itinerary, which carries you throughout the country--and every state, literally--it looks as though, something's really happened to Black dance. Now, what has happened, that has caused these Black dance companies to flourish?

Rod Rodgers 00:02:07.880
Well, we're very excited about the kind of reception that our companies are getting on th--in the concert field, both in colleges and universities and in major theaters across the country. I think that, one indication of the openness or the new interest in Black musical art and theater, that we see is in the legitimate theater here on Broadway like the New York phenomena, is the the the Black musicals, which are, at this point, providing the backbone of the Broadway--American Broadway season and really keeping that whole thing alive. You know, at a point where nothing else was happening that was, that was creating a comparable interest. Well, well similar to that: there are, there is a kind of success story that's that's unprecedented in the excitement that's being created by companies like Alvin Ailey and Arthur Mitchell--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:58.071
and Rod Rodgers

Rod Rodgers 00:02:59.031
-- well and Rod Rodgers Dance Company. And they are, but they are, apart from the Ailey and the Mitchell groups who would get so much publicity, there are, there are a number of really exciting Black American dance artists who are working and touring and, just generating a lot of interest that, that you just don't hear so much about in the white publications. We think our company is, is definitely one of those.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:19.222
And it's interesting you said that, Black musicals sustaining in Broadway theater and Black dance has been, in a sense a catalyst for the opening up of dance as a mass culture phenomenon. And you have to think back to the turn of the century when James Weldon and J. Rosamond Johnson, Black songwriters, lyricist James Weldon Johnson wrote "Lift Every Voice and Sing," the Black national anthem, were the premier writers on Broadway at that time.

Rod Rodgers 00:03:51.310
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:52.161
And, also if we look at our history of dance, practically all of our dance and show business comes from Black dance. The dance of the old minstrels and the bucking when dances and the like,

Rod Rodgers 00:04:04.030
It all comes out of that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:05.181
And, the thing that we [sighs] have to remind ourselves of, as "Roots" has done so vividly recently, is that Black people have been indigenous part of American life and American culture, and in our struggle, which still continues, has been one that we ourselves have been actively involved in. And speaking of struggle, could you tell us something about the types of things that your works--the works of the Rod Rodgers Dance Company--tends to reflect, in terms of the struggles, or the tribulations, the life, the happiness of Black Americans?

Rod Rodgers 00:04:38.610
Well the first pieces that I did, about 15 years ago when I came to New York, from Detroit, where I had also had a dance company, were not dealing specifically with traditional African-American themes and that was, really coming out of the fact that I was looking around and I saw Talley Beatty and Alvin Ailey and, that was before Arthur Mitchell had any kind of a company or had a company. And some of the--let's see, who else was it--it was, it was Dom McHale at that time.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:04.551
Dom McHale, right.

Rod Rodgers 00:05:04.554
And they were doing marvelous and exciting jazz ballets and getting a lot of mileage and doing some good things with those. But it occurred to me that if, I came and worked, tried to work in the same style of the same area I would end up probably just being compared--for better or for worse--with those people. I, had had a background as a percussionist and had really grown up as a dancer and, through studying Tai chi and through working with some experimental choreographers here in New York, began to get an idea of how to to create a theatrical style or form that would be special for us and would be individual for us. And that was, what I call experimental percussion work. A lot of the ethnic companies in the world work with live percussion with bells, castanets, cymbals, drums of all kinds. But, modern dance companies by and large, don't do very much work with that that kind of live percussive element. And, I began to work with a small group of people initially, on experimenting with ways where dancers could create rhythmic sounds and effects with instruments that they carried. And this was really an influence of my early study with the Afro Afro-Caribbean dance forms and styles--and Afro-Haitian and Afro-Cuban--with a guy who was an offshoot of Katherine Dunham, who was based out in Detroit. And was--first, I guess it was initially through that kind of work and through the work that was stylistically related to my study with, movement forms and T'ai chi ch'üan, that our company first began to get recognition. And this was, really the first American company, under the direction of a Black artist, to get recognition by major critics for something other than traditional African-American dance styles; like it wasn't blues based jazz forms or, you know, African dance or anything like that that we were doing. We were called an avant-garde, a Black avant-garde dance company, which, which is a title that I think, you know, we earned, except that, the word "avant-garde" is overused, you know. And even the word "experimental" where dance is concerned is overused.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:09.530
Well, talking about that, recognizing that we are on an oral medium rather than a visual medium. Could you explain, how in your work, the movements that you and your dancers make to develop whatever particular theme you're developing, and the music integrate, and how that differentiates from, as you say, the blues-based or the jazz-based modern dance of many of the other groups?

Rod Rodgers 00:07:38.480
Well, now we--When we first started, we did that more exclusively. Since then, we've also gotten into working with the musical Black popular artists. So that's another dimension that the company at this point does have. The, the first part though, the thing which as I said, we got our recognition for originally here in this city, is,--Well, contemporary dance and modern dance really--in a pluralistic society that really is influenced by a lot of different cultures--it's always a blending of things. I mean, what is "pure" in this country? As soon as people began to see kung fu, then that whole kung fu movement thing became part of the popular movement vocabulary. You see it in social dance, you go to a concert, dance there as you see them doing karate steps. You know, what they call "karate steps." It's, it's part of our experience because we're in like a media age and everything we see we absorb it and we put it to work, you know, without even knowing always where it came from. But I knew, you know, when I got here, that I was not going to be, you know, white famous ballerina or ballet dancer or whatever. It was about trying to find a way, since I hadn't never really gravitated towards ballet as a basic style--classical Western ballet--to create what I called Afro- modern form, Afro-jazz forms, blues-based jazz or something coming out of a natural flowing movement that had some relationship to Tai chi. I guess people who are not familiar with Tai chi might be more familiar with the kind of katas that they do as exercises for karate, and for zen combat, which was part of my own movement experience, and I wanted to bring all that into play, into the kind of theater that I was producing, and, and did that. I was lucky that I had a chance to study with a guy named Eric Hawkins, who is considered to be very far out, and he's very much interested in Zen philosophy and in the kind of movement that the Orientals have brought to their theater like noh theater and those kinds of things. But I was interested in a more forceful dynamic because I was coming from the point of view of being a hand drummer, working with congas and hand drums and those kinds of things.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:47.810
Well when you choreograph a piece, what goes into your thing? What's the first thing you do, when you choreograph a piece?

Rod Rodgers 00:09:56.970
There is--I don't have any, any w--any one way of approaching the work. Like, sometimes I start off with a specific idea and, and construct like, st--like like just like a painter might start off with a canvas and an idea and put strokes of color on the canvas and find it developed into a finished painting. We always start off with movement of some kind or with physical movement images that can be created by the dancers themselves, that relate to an idea that we're working for, towards. But sometimes, I have a really, specific--like, a structural--concept where the dance is concerned, that I know will, will, once complete, will create a certain kind of idea image, like the piece "Box 1971" came from the inspiration, and it was really a terrifying inspiration, of the killing of George Jackson, the men of Attica, and it wasn't about then creating a dance about George Jackson or about Attica. But what seemed to me to be the positive thing that happened in 1971 was a lot of people on the outside began to wake up to the fact that we have some responsibility for, and in fact some identity with, the people inside. And that was a painful awakening, and a dramatic awakening. I was working at Harvard at the time, teaching a summer course in dance. There was a marvelous composer there [stuttering] percussion-percussion-percussionist and composer named Sidney Smart. And we worked over a period of weeks to create "Box," which depicted, the really painful awakening of a man outside of a little cell box situation, to the fact that he had some identity with a man that was inside; in fact in his own way he's inside too.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:30.082
Now, as you create a piece--choreograph it--do you, do this by notes, or do you use a system like Labanotation, or do you just get a group of people and they begin to, to move it out, and that becomes a dance?

Rod Rodgers 00:11:46.420
I do my sketches on people's bodies. Like, I--I know a lot of dancers who work with paper notes and everything, and I make paper notes, but, in the final analysis, the thing that interests me most, or the thing that I can hang on to, is a visual, physical thing that I can feel. I get, um--Choreographers have to be visually excitable--you know, apart from the intellectual part of it. They have to be able to like look at something and get very excited. You know. I can get very excited over just watching kids run around playing on a playground. I like to watch football and basketball no matter who wins cause I like to see people running around like that. You know. So like, just the visual thing is very high for me. When I get a group of dancers in the studio, I start moving them around; it always suggests a lot of different possibilities for me. And the big job, I think, of a choreographer as any artist, is to be able to select those things from the movement material or movement images that that are available and that happen very freely when you get a bunch of creative dancers together that, to really select those things which which can add up to something specific and that will be meaningful.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:48.880
How much input do you get from the actual dancers in creating a number and a piece? And then, when a new dancer comes in, does the piece change?

Rod Rodgers 00:12:59.980
The chemistry of an ensemble of dancers--because I work with a group of dancers that are in fact my instrument, the individual dancer's body is his own instrument. But my instrument is an, a group of people, like an ensemble of dancers, and there's all kinds of, like, relationships and things that just happen in them being together physically which I see and I feed on. Most of the the lines of movement that I create--this which what people call steps, though they're not really done in the feet it's an entire body that's involved--I actually spin out of my own body. But I don't see myself move, I see them move. So their influence and their input is enormous and, you know, the degree to which their interpretation of the movement idea that I have is, they're not like, something that I program, you know. They are a contributing and collaborating factor in the dances that we create. Some of the dances that we do have a lot of--we'll have interpretive--what I call interpretive latitude, like you might write a piece of music which will be interpreted differently by different musicians--but, some of the pieces that I do are very specific and must be done exactly and precisely a certain way and they do not--they're not allowed to change greatly by different dancers coming in.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:14.292
[unintelligible]

Rod Rodgers 00:14:14.681
I would pick someone who could do it the way I wanted it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:17.201
Which raises the question, like in music, you know, Ellington; he has his score and bands try to play Ellington. No one played Ellington like Duke's band, or like Mercer, leading Ellington's band now. If someone saw a piece that your group would choreograph, let's say "Visions" or "Box" or what have you, could they do it, without your help?

Rod Rodgers 00:14:41.170
Someone from my company would probably have to work with them or someone who was thoroughly familiar with the style that we work in. We just put a piece on a group out of Denver, Colorado. I went out for a few weeks to work with a lady named Cleo Parker Robinson, who has a, a s--you could call it a struggling young Black dance company--actually, by New York standards, who are not struggling as much as a lot of people [laugh] right here in the city--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:15:00.621
Right they think are

Rod Rodgers 00:15:02.082
--they think they are. It's a different kind of struggle cause they have a lovely studio and all that, you know, lots of community support. But, I taught them a piece called "Percussion Suite" which is one of the early percussion and experimental percussion works that we did, and what it was about was them--was finding a way that they could do an interpretation of the piece that was acceptable to me, rather than asking them or expecting them do it exactly the way dancers whom I had trained would do it. But, if a piece is good, I think if a work of art is really good, like a good play, it can stand all kinds of interpretations and something still comes through of the original idea and inspiration of the piece that's very clearly not just the steps or the musical elements but the quality of the thing. There's a lot of--I don't even know how to talk about it, it'd be easier to show it--but a stylistic quality that has specifically to do with the original image that I had. They were able to begin to just capture a bit of it, enough of it, so I saw my piece in what they were doing. Another choreographer friend of mine Hélio Palmeiro went out after I did to work with them and he was able to take them, from his point of view a little further into interpreting the style, you know, in the way that should have been done.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:15.020
And tonight on "Soul of Reason" we're talking with Rod Rodgers, who is director and originator of the Rod Rodgers dance company. And as we talk about Black dance, we were saying before the program, that the National Endowment for the Arts has contributed a great deal to the spread of Black dance companies or the growth of Black dance companies, because they have underwritten these tours and go all over the country to various community groups, colleges, et cetera. And I know that in your most recent tour, one of the pieces you have been presenting is what you call your bicentennial piece, "Visions of a New Blackness." So could you tell us a little something about what you tried to do in that piece and also the reaction, particularly of the student audiences, to that piece?

Rod Rodgers 00:17:01.450
For the bicentennial year, we wanted to really do several things. Really, it was to continue our, what we call positive eclecticism, that we do works that are experimental and then we do works that are more like social realism that are very very specific. In the first area, we did some experimental things with dance in the round with what people call abstract ideas, but I don't think you can really abstract a human body. So that was, that but that's what it's been called. The other area and the thing that you're referring to now, "Visions of a New Blackness," was really designed to be a tribute to the ideas and heroic efforts of Black American leaders through history, without really dealing with any one character individually as like trying to do the life of or an incident from this particular person. But we did go did a lot of research. We got a marvelous collection of slides from prints and tintype photographs that we used as a kind of mixed media effect in the background. And we also have poetic excerpts in the form of a narrative, written narrative and spoken narrative, that was created by Lawrence-Holder, from the writings of Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth, Martin Luther King, you know and he instead of trying to just literally literally quote them he would take ideas from their writings, and sometimes verbatim, passages verbatim. And we built them as, what I call poetic transitions, in some instances actually dancing to the words of some of the writings and ideas of these people like the Frederick Douglass Fourth of July speech, that was I think 1856. When a lot of people hear it are they think it's a contemporary militant. You know, this is like over 100 years ago. A lot of the young Blacks that we run into are surprised about, by the material that we're doing, the narrative sources too, because many of them had the ideas that Black protest was something that really originated in the 60s.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:00.310
Yeah, with them.

00:19:00.462
[laughter]

Rod Rodgers 00:19:02.802
But we've had some, an interesting variety of reactions. This was really designed to be a Black celebration, or a celebration of Black history and our pride in that. It is historic, based on a lot of the images and ideas are based on the historic moments, what we call the high moments in the historic progression or those moments that we thought we could illustrate in dance form best. And a lot of people today seem to feel, that just like "Roots," by just pointing to these historic facts, that you're doing something that is in a theater of confrontation of some kind or militant statement, when in fact, there is no pitting white against Black in this or anything like that. It isn't that kind of thing. When you talk about, when you take, when you go into the writings of Sojourner Truth and you look at some of the writings by Dubois, there was a tremendous kind of feeling of urgency in those people's writings where they, they were trying to, by dramatizing the social issues and things they were concerned about, they were they were calling for an immediate change. But the writings that we're pulling from, most of them are not from people like Amiri Baraka and they're not from Stokely Carmichael, or even, for the most most of it not not even from Martin Luther King or Malcolm X. They're, most of it comes from people who in their own time made heroic efforts to call attention to problems and because of that ur--but because of that urgency, a lot of people think that it's, it's a militant statement that we're doing but it isn't really, I don't think.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:47.260
I have a certain amount of envy for Black artists like yourself who were able to express, through your music or your words or your movement, the concerns that so many of us have as Blacks. And in a sense art, particularly Black arts are the conscience of a society, the conscience of America. But in addition they seem to be a release, a valve, whereby you can say to the world what you want to say and mobilize other people to begin to get a feeling for this. Does this feeling or this energy source come in conflict in any way with just what traditional in the Western world has been the role of the artist to just create and feel himself or herself?

Rod Rodgers 00:21:36.740
Artists have always been political, as as people. I mean "Alice in Wonderland" was really a very political satire at the time that it was done, and we don't see the imagery that they were working with. One of the most famous dances that Martha Graham created, "The Scarlet Letter," was a very highly political statement, but no one ever raised the question of whether it was great art or not. There is no necessary--there isn't necessarily any conflict, a contradiction between socially or politically inspired art and, and good art or great art. Very often artists who, who try to to be like, literal, if they're working in a non-literal form, often end up being like pedantic or kind of heavy handed and they may defeat, defeat themselves, because they might make a statement that really is a literary statement they're trying to do it in a dance form and that could create problems for them, but--and certainly problems from the point of view of critics who are sensitive to the--some critics are sensitive really, I do think, by the way [laughs]--by critics who are sensitive to the better things or the best that can be done in a particular form. At the same time, I don't always create the theater that I do, like I've never really created a dance for a critic. You know. Some of the things that I do: I work in what I call social realism, in a way that doesn't necessarily reflect current experi--technical experimentation that I might be doing because there's a particular comment that I'm making which I wish to make to an audience that I suspect may not be technically oriented. I might do something in a very heavy-handed way to make a particular kind of point, not because I don't know how to choreograph subtle ideas and subtle elements, because I'm trying to create a street theater piece and then, just because I feel like it and sometimes I get into trouble is I'll take a piece that was designed as a street theater piece and put it into a concert setting, and, all right, hey you know, I'm wearing a lot of different hats. One is as a choreographer, an experimental choreographer, one is certainly as a director of a company. Another is as a salesman who's interested in marketing a product of a particular type, and then I'm a showman, you know and all those hats don't always go together, you know.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:02.360
Sometimes that you get mixed roles.

Rod Rodgers 00:24:04.132
Sometimes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:04.911
Speaking about support, how is your company supported and how can the public help to increase the support?

Rod Rodgers 00:24:10.760
Well, the Rod Rodgers Dance Company currently is based in a studio which offers classes in, year-round down at 8 East 12th Street near Fifth Avenue and, we--most of our rehearsals are done at that studio. The company is maintained with support from the public sector through the National Endowment for the Arts and New York State Council for the Arts and through grants that we've gotten from the city cultural agencies, what is the Office of Cultural Affairs here in the, in New York. But, just as important as that support is, has been private contributions from people who, who really understand the kind of thing that we are doing, since we're creating prototypes. It's healthiest when it's when when it has the support of people who are really interested in seeing this kind of thing happen. We also as a business entity depend heavily upon the earned income that we get from the touring that we do across the country and we're approaching a 30-week season at this point. The company will actually be touring and performing between 20, 25, and 30 weeks in the coming year, which is a lot, really.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:24.320
That is a tremendous amount. What about young people who want to get into dance? Are there many opportunities for Black young people to get training in dance?

Rod Rodgers 00:25:31.701
New York is still the center of the world as far as the Western world of dance is concerned, and a lot of people are constantly coming to the city, thinking they wish to go into dance as a performing art. Not so many of them are able to stay in it. It's, it's very difficult it isn't--I guess, I guess part of the reason which you were referring to earlier is not that the op--some opportunities don't exist, but that they have misconceptions about what what success in the arts would mean. It doesn't necessarily mean that you will ever make a great deal of money, for instance, and there is a way where we teach our youngsters that success

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:10.641
Is money.

Rod Rodgers 00:26:11.090
is money, right? [laughs] But success for an artist--I mean there's a certain thing where where survival as an artist and the ability to continue as an artist in itself is synonymous with success. If you can find a way to continue painting or to continue dancing and to create paintings and dances that interest you and that you think are exciting and meaningful, you have succeeded. You have definitely succeeded.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:33.060
Are there some people whose body builds tend to outlive or go beyond the ability to perform? A lot of young people come in, they have a certain kind of body builds. They want to become dancers; they train and train, but somehow or another, they don't ever seem to make it because either their legs are too short or too long, their hips are too wide and what have you--is that a myth or is that actually a fact?

Rod Rodgers 00:26:56.460
Well it's a fact. There is, if you look at people's proportions on a stage and see different groups of people moving or different people moving, certain people will have body lines, or silhouettes even, that will visually excite you more than others. It's like watching a certain kind--like an instrument or a racehorse or something, I mean, cert-- a certain kind of ideal build or ideal proportion will give one horse an advantage over another. And this is a physical problem. I mean, the art, the dance art is a physical medium. It's an athletic form basically, and then of course the people have to be musicians and actors and actresses too. But there's no doubt in my mind and, or anyone who has experienced in the field, that people with certain kinds of more idealic bodies from the western aesthetic point of view have a definite advantage over a woman who may be a beautiful woman with wide, baby-bearing hips and short legs and lovely full bosom. I mean, you know, she might be lovely off the stage but when she gets

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:52.291
She's not gonna make it as a dancer.

Rod Rodgers 00:27:53.732
She's gonna have trouble. [laughs] As she gets out into something as balletic in its orientation that emphasizes geometric lines and designs.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:01.661
Well, what are some of your plans for the future?

Rod Rodgers 00:28:03.541
Well the company is going to continue its touring. We're going to continue our work with us put a special emphasis always on pieces that we think will have special significance to people in the Black community. [Stuttering] We're we're we're doing performances in New York through the summer season extensively as we do every year and that'll be the next major series here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:24.810
And I'm sure our audience will be hearing a lot from Rod Rodgers dance company. Our guest on tonight sole reason has been Rod Rodgers, choreographer, dancer, director, and founder of the Rod Rodgers Dance Company and we've been talking about the role of Black dance in the artistic life of America.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:40.080
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason," with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

