Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:31.910
That's Count Basie, who will be featured in this year's Newport in New York Jazz Festival. Jazz is black Americans' legacy to the culture of the world. Hear Joyce Wein associate producer of Newport in New York Jazz Festival discuss what's happening this year in the festival on tonight's "Soul of Reason". This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the black thoughts.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:15.910
"Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:36.970
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Joyce Wein and we are talking about Newport in New York Jazz Festival 1976, your bicentennial festival.

Joyce Wein 00:01:47.410
Thank you, it's very nice to be here, Dr.Brown.

00:01:48.882
Well first of all just tell us what's going to happen this year because there's so many exciting things that you folks have planned. I really would be interested in.

Joyce Wein 00:01:57.520
All right well just briefly, it's going to be 10 days of great music. It has to be great because I think jazz is our greatest music and it has that intellectual stimulation, as well as the great heritage of black music that most of the music doesn't have. It combines the best of, of, what you can get in music and this year we have several themes that run through our festival. Count Basie, who now that Duke Ellington is dead, is is the only great King of Jazz.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:30.040
That's right, that's left. We lost Louis and we've lost Duke and we have our Count.

Joyce Wein 00:02:34.630
That's right. And because of that you can't hear too much of Count Basie and we're on that theory we're going to present him three times at least during the festival. On the first weekend we're doing a new thing out at Waterloo Village, a beautiful area in northern New Jersey. Count Basie will play on Saturday night, June 26. The next weekend, on Saturday July 3rd, they'll be in Carnegie Hall at 11:30PM which is when jazz is at its best I think, late at night.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:05.831
After midnight.

Joyce Wein 00:03:08.071
[Laughs] Count Basie will have a reunion with Joe Williams and his great band of the 50s plus the band that he has now. And on Monday July 5th, that last day of the festival, Count Basie is going to play at Roseland and there's nothing better than dancing to the music of Count Basie. So that's the kind of thing that we're doing this year.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:29.210
You know you and George, your husband George, really deserve a tremendous amount of credit for keeping this, Newport Jazz Festival, now the Newport in New York alive because for a long time there was a question as to whether jazz was going to really survive. And I think it is the music of course will survive. I'm talking about getting the interest of young people, and now you have so many young people who are interested in jazz.

Joyce Wein 00:03:54.101
I keep hearing that fact and I think it's what you're having is the musically curious youngsters, who still like rock but then demand something more. And so these are the young people who are now listening to Herbie Hancock, who's going to be on the festival, and to Billy Carbone. And then if they're really curious, that kind of thing, or maybe they come into the blues, for instance we're going to have Muddy Waters on the Newport Jazz Festival this year. Then they go on and then they discover the Ellingtons, the Basies, and so forth. But Roscoe, jazz is popular but mostly with jazz fans. It's not a majority music, it's a minority music in many ways.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:42.401
That's interesting. So you and I probably go back a long time, and we are longtime jazz fan, and I guess you think that everyone digs jazz. On the other hand, there was a F.M. radio station here in a city that was devoted to jazz, WRVR, and they were about to go off and go classical and look like the whole city rose up to hold the station. When we ever we talk about American culture, the culture of America is jazz. It's black music. By the way at your New Jersey Festival Wyatt Tee Walker, Reverend Wyatt Tee Walker, who's been on our program several times talking about the black church is going to bring one of his groups, the gospel groups together, and talk about black gospel music and that is one of the most fantastic things that you can hear.

Joyce Wein 00:05:30.130
All right. Well it's not going to be one group. I think it's going to be five or six church choirs from the New York/New Jersey area and we are going to have a real gospel, picnic. You know Newport Jazz Festival used to take place outdoors in Newport, Rhode Island and now we're sort of citified or urbanised the festival and for the last two years it's taken place inside of the concert halls like Carnegie Hall and Radio City Music Hall, which it will again, but this year we've added one fantastic thing I think and that is a weekend of outdoor events at Waterloo Village and on Saturday, July 26 we're going to have a gospel picnic.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:09.851
No, you mean Saturday June 26.

Joyce Wein 00:06:10.741
I'm sorry, Saturday June 26. We're going to bring up even Buster Holmes, a chef from New Orleans, to give that authentic black soul cooking to our picnic. And on June 27, Sunday afternoon, there will be a jazz picnic for us straight jazz fans. But I think it's a good idea because New Yorkers so seldom have an opportunity to get out of the city to pleasant surroundings. And this is just an hour's drive or you can take a bus.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:40.960
Now for folks in the audience who want to find out about the festival, find out about the tickets and so on, how do they go about finding this out?

Joyce Wein 00:06:50.531
If you're in New York City area code 212-787-2020 will give you all the information about the festival. Tickets can be bought by mail order but easily now at through all the ticket-tron agencies in the New York/New Jersey area, Connecticut, anywhere. And in addition we have a box office at the Sheraton Hotel on 7th Avenue and 56th Street, so you can just walk in and get tickets to any event.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:21.930
Now in others words, the joint should be jumping. Now speaking of a joint jumping I realize that this is not a philanthropic venture on the part of Newport in New York. I guess we all wish it were and we wish our society supported the arts to that extent. But how do you package this? I know you have some collaborators from the business community. You do most of the promotion yourself. You help with some of the neighborhood jazz concerts and so on. Could you tell us though something about this? I remember a couple of years ago, maybe three years ago, some of the younger jazz musicians wanted to boycott the festival, and they set up an alternative festival. I think we talked with some of the folks on the show about it. And then George tried to integrate them with the festival. So tell us something about the finance of the festival, not the in secrets, but just the general idea, and well in fact it is successful. I know it certainly is culturally successful because everyone looks forward to it each year.

Joyce Wein 00:08:21.190
I would say that yes the Newport Jazz Festival is successful, as we said before jazz is not big business and it can't be. But at the same time, jazz does not receive even the minimal financial support that other art forms do. And I'm not asking for this for the Newport Jazz Festival, which you've stated is our business. But at the same time jazz needs all the help that it can get. And the Newport Jazz Festival has been very fortunate in the fact that the Joseph Schiltz Brewing Company, which is one of the corporations in America that has given to the arts. It's given to the New York Philharmonic over the years in New York, has, has, stayed with us as a sponsor. Without their help and the longevity of their help, that would have been very difficult I think for the Newport Jazz Festival to last so long. But you know we have become the establishment. I don't feel so much like an establishment figure, but my husband for instance, to the younger jazz musicians seems like the establishment, and that of course is why you have rebel festivals or you have the Young Turks, so to speak, who feel that they aren't getting a fair shake on the festival. But I think all of that is very healthy, and in a way perhaps when we tried to include these groups in the Newport Jazz Festival, perhaps that might have been a slight injustice because it's healthier when you have your own revolution on your own. And so now I think you have --there was just a Loft Festival--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:02.791
I was about to say but I think they call it jazz mania or something like that in various lofts. And that was very, very successful. And of course one of the things about counterculture movements or anti-established movements is that's what gives the verve and the life to, the, to the movement. One thing that I noticed is sometimes I go to the concerts and I hear, this, the same song played the same way with the same solos. And I say that's not the way it's supposed to be. Not that the songs aren't supposed to come across that way, but the part of the challenge of jazz is the improvisation. And I think the great masters of people like Duke, Count, and Dizzy and Louie, and so on, they keep that up it's there. Sometimes the public expects to hear the same solo in the same way. And if that happens too often--these are my opinion--that kills off some of the real excitement behind jazz.

Joyce Wein 00:10:53.080
I think that's true and I think that, most, at most jazz concerts you will you will hear something new something different. But during the festival we have the New York Jazz Repertory Company doing something, which I'll have to throw open to you for your comment. The New York Jazz Repertory Company which is a nonprofit company is going to do four concerts on Duke Ellington and they are going to be recreations of the music of Duke Ellington. Duke Ellington is not here anymore ,nor is Johnny Hodges or all those great soloists but this company is going to try to recreate the classics, much as we hear the music of Beethoven today. Now this is, this is, food for thought and these concerts have to be vital, the music has to be vital, but what the New York jazz Repertory Company is saying is do we have to lose the music of Duke Ellington because he is no longer here. Can we not play it the way we play the great masters? Now jazz is a young music, only 75-100 years old. Perhaps now it's not bad to, too soon to start classicising it so that you can go to concerts 15 years from now and still hear that music that we love.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:14.650
You said you wanted me to comment on it, and just by coincidence in my capacity as a professor at New York University, I'm working with a doctoral candidate, a PhD candidate, by name of Leon Dodson who's taking five of Ellington standards and rearranging them for high school jazz orchestras, so that in fact will institutionalize the music of Duke Ellington at least at the high school level. And I think you're very right. This is the kind of thing that needs to be done. And if you look at jazz as a cultural extension and it is a cultural extension of the whole culture of black people. Newport in New York does it, but any jazz organization or any jazz festival does that kind of thing. Again for the benefit of our audience could you tell them how they might find out more about the festival and where they might obtain tickets?

Joyce Wein 00:13:02.952
By telephone. 787-2020, or go to the hall which the concerts are being performed. There are tickets at Carnegie Hall box office, at the Sheraton Hotel, we have a box office open every day from now on and also on all ticket-tron agencies.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:24.671
And in the background we have "Royal Garden Blues" by Count Basie who'll be one of the featured performers. At this year's Newport in New York Jazz Festival. Count Basie is one of our last remaining jazz giants. But we know that there will be others and you get a chance to see some of the other jazz giants in this year's Newport in New York Jazz Festival.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:47.470
With us this evening is Joyce Wein, who is associate producer of Newport in New York Jazz Festival and it looks to me Joyce as though you really are going to have a record breaking festival this bicentennial year. We're talking about America's contributions to culture. We talked about black's contributions to culture. And here we really have an opportunity to popularize jazz and to make America at large, a world more at large, about the significant contribution of blacks in music, in jazz music. In your opinion has jazz become more popular because of the festival? This is over the years going back to, I think it was 1954, when George first put the festival together.

Joyce Wein 00:14:33.340
I think you could say that, what, what Newport has done, I don't think it by itself has made jazz more popular, but it means that once a year the attention of the press, of jazz fans, is focused on one event. It's like a little bit like having the World Series, whether or not you're a baseball fan, you are aware of the fact that the World Series is taking place. So what the Newport Jazz Festival does each year is heighten the consciousness of jazz in America. And that I think is a very important part that the Newport Jazz Festival can play because, as you know, there are many people who say, 'oh yes I like jazz', but they can't name one jazz artist and they think of it as being very American, but they really don't know anything about it. And so little by little I hope this percolates because jazz is such a vital music and it will be played as long as there are musicians to play it. That's a way of life. Jazz is not going to die, but for it to survive because it survives by being at least somewhat commercially profitable too. You have to have enough people to go to concerts, to buy records, and to do these kinds of things. We must make people more aware of jazz. And besides, it's such good music.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:08.260
That's an interesting thing about jazz. Somehow or another people associate it with bars, and at one time brothels, and low-life places, and so people are sort of sneaking out to get a view of the other side the seamy side of life. Yet as you say there is a such exciting, beautiful, creative music that it's no reason for it to fall under that category and it should be commercially successful, certainly the rock aspects of jazz have been become tremendously commercially successful. But somehow or another the traditional jazz with instruments without a lot of electronic attachments tend not to go. Although I believe in this year's festival you bring in a lot more of the electronically oriented jazz music.

Joyce Wein 00:17:03.090
Well you know each festival in a way derives from the preceding one and I think perhaps we had a scarcity of electronic music this year. And we have more, last year, and we have more of it this year. But each festival ends up having a character of its own when you have a chance to look back at it, but you plan the best way that you can. And so that we have Jazz that will interest young people, young fans. We have traditional jazz, we have Count Basie, Duke Ellington that kind of thing, Buddy Rich. We have Charlie Mingus, certainly one of the great modern figures in jazz and I haven't even mentioned a concert with Dizzy Gillespie and Thelonious Monk. So you can see that what we try to do each year is in a way is to hold a mirror up to the world of jazz. We have some of the younger musicians. Anthony Braxton, people like that. And to say this is jazz and try all of it or some of it. Now one of the groups that you had mentioned earlier, the New York Jazz Repertory Company is recreating some of the music of Duke Ellington and one of Duke Ellington's great compositions was "Black, Brown and Beige" which really deals with his expressions of how music, and the church, and our religion have sustained us and maybe we could take a moment in the program to just hear an excerpt from Duke Ellington's "Black, Brown and Beige" with Mahalia Jackson, uh, singing. "Lord, dear Lord I've loved, God almighty / God of love, please look down and see my people through / Lord, dear Lord I've loved, God almighty / God of love, please look down and see my people through / I believe the sun and moon will shine up in the sky / When the day is gray I know it, clouds passing by / He'll give peace and comfort / To every troubled mind" That was a beautiful expert. Mahalia, singing behind Duke. Both of them gone but yet both of them giants, and the sense is the New York jazz Repertory Company attempt to recreate this, as you were saying earlier, it institutionalizes the music of a great black musician. Another great black musician left us last year, and it was Cannonball Adderley and I understand that you're going to have a program that's dedicated to Cannonball and his brother Nat and some of the other giants of his era. Yes. -- Are going to be playing. Friday night, July 2nd at Carnegie Hall, Cannonball Adderley's musical, or maybe a jazz opera, called "Big Man: The Legend of John Henry" is going to be performed and I think this may be the first actual performance of it. It was recorded on Fantasy Records, I believe. But we're looking forward to this and it's our way of paying a tribute to Cannonball Adderley, who was one of our great musicians, great teacher. A great teacher, a graduate of Florida A&M. He taught literally as a profession and he taught through his music to all of the younger jazz musicians. One thing I noticed about jazz is that somehow or another it seems to take a tremendous toll on the people who participate in it. Toll in terms of their personal lives, sometimes total in terms of actual lives. Is this something that sort of indigenous to this type of music or is it just sort of a fall out that our society expects maybe too many things of our jazz musicians or maybe they do it to themselves? I'm, I'm hoping that this less mortality rate will change as jazz musicians have the opportunity to live better, not to travel so much or under such bad circumstances as they did years ago, and because jazz music that musicians should have a great longevity because they're not pop pop artists who have a hit record and then may disappear or be popular for two or three years. Jazz musicians we should we should cherish the way Arthur Rubinstein is cherished if he misses a note at age 88. We say, 'how charming and how wonderful that he is still with us' and we are very fortunate, for instance, to still have Eubie Blake, but we also have the Vic Dickenson's, the Doc Cheatham's of this world and we would like the Tony Williams's of this world to be here 50 years from now. And so we have to, we can't discard our jazz musicians and ask if they're number one on the charts. We have to say whatever artistry it is that they can give to us, we must do our best to see that they will be able to do it all of a very long life. I feel that very strongly. I do too. And one of the highlights of the festival that I've observed is your annual ferry ride, what you call it, Ride on the Hudson, to New Orleans jazz. And I had personally occasion to meet some of those older men from New Orleans who had played up and down Rampart Street, or wherever else they played, and there was, it was really one of the great thrills of my life to actually hear these people play and then to meet them and then to sit on the, on the ferry, as it cruises in New York Harbor and talk with them about some of their experiences in New Orleans. And let's say the New Orleans musicians are leaving us fast too because Jim Robinson He was one of the gentlemen I met. Yes great trombone player, died just a month or so ago, but interestingly enough in New Orleans some of the sons of the New Orleans musicians who have played bebop or Bach or soul or whatever are now starting to play the traditional New Orleans music. Of course they've changed it a little bit, but I think it means that this music will last a little bit longer that they will play in the parade bands and in places like Preservation Hall and still carry it because we don't have to lose one thing while gaining another. I guess that's what we'd like to say. Yes we want all the avant garde music and we want all the young artists to, to find their way and to become great musicians. But let's not toss our past away because it's very short. I think that over the past two or three years the resistance on the part of young blacks to really looking at jazz, they said, 'Jazz was a slave music. It was the master's music'. And so I think that resistance has diminished somewhat because they recognize as the fellow says, 'you do what you have to do when you have to do it'. And at one time this was a way in which we developed our culture and we carried our messages. And even though jazz comes out of certain things that we may not socially be proud of right now, the fact is it's great music, the fact that it stayed with us, and the real fact as I said at the top of show is that this is black America's legacy to the culture of the world, like this is America's legacy to the culture of the world, and to preserve it as something that is really very, very important. I gather that you and George plan to continue with all the good things willing these festivals and hopefully other groups throughout the country will try these kind of things--jazz festivals, and there are people like Norman Granz and so on who've done a number of kinds of festivals. It went back many years ago to Jazz Philharmonic so that there is, a, again, a beginning to be a heritage. Yes, there's a jazz festival in Monterey that's given each year by Jimmy Lyons that takes place I think in September or October. We are associated with a great festival in New Orleans each April that features the music of the city of New Orleans. Well that's quite a city for music. So you have soul music, jazz, rock, Cajun music, and then of course we have the great New Orleans food. Well I think that New York City and the jazz world and the culture world owes a lot to Newport in New York for continuing this heritage of jazz and presenting our music to the world at large. And I'd like to thank you Joyce Wein, associate producer of Newport in New York Jazz Festival for being with us on tonight's "Soul of Reason" and telling us about this wonderful legacy of black America to the world. Thank you.

