Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.541
Drugs suicide. Emotional instability psychosis mental retardation. These are among the many mental health problems of New Yorkers here. Dr. June Christmas commissioner of New York City's Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation discussed these problems on tonight's soul of reason.

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:39.772
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Speaker 3 00:01:07.610
Our guest on tonight's sole reason is Dr. June Jackson Christmas who is commissioner of the New York City Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation which of course is a mouthful to talk about the many many mental health problems we have in New York City and I thought we might begin this show June by talking about the nature of the mental health problem in the nation's largest metropolis New York City. I think it's good that you mentioned the fact that we are the largest city in the country because some of the problems that people experience come from bigness. Many people feel alienated from each other. Many of the injuries that occur on murder attempts at violence are among families and friends. There's a lot of close ups. There certainly it is sad. In addition alcoholism is a mounting problem in the big cities and in New York City. We used to estimate that perhaps one out of every 10 persons at some time in his or her life would need the help of mental health professionals in large cities it may be even a higher percentage people become seriously ill. Depression is increasing suicides increasing and then of course we have all the other problems that perhaps aren't so noticeable children who go to school and really don't learn and who have behavior problems and old people who become depressed can't handle the physical ailments put aside by their families. There is a myriad of problems.

Speaker 3 00:02:38.980
And of course all you have to do is to walk the streets of New York one of these dark mornings when we are going to work and realize that on a dull dreary day the hustle and bustle and the problems seem so much greater. And I'm always impressed by the fact that on holidays always the increase in suicides.

Speaker 4 00:03:00.110
Yes. Do you see you have the contrast between what should be the good times of getting together and the loneliness and the extreme distance that people feel even though they're surrounded by millions of other people. Large cities tend toward separating people. We live in such small houses or apartments that we don't keep our grandparents our parents with us to help us raise our children perhaps in the black family. There is still more reliance upon the aunt or the uncle or who has retired or the man who is no longer working in the post office or running on the road or in the days when there was a railroad.

Speaker 5 00:03:33.990
That's all I want to say but that's right.

Speaker 6 00:03:36.560
Occupations have changed people are uncertain as to where they belong. And there are many many stresses that contribute toward people not being able to cope effectively not being able to work up to their potential because a hopeful sign.

Speaker 3 00:03:50.510
If you want to call it hopeful is the recent New York Times survey which showed that people in New York generally feel because of maybe the provincialism of New York. Things are better here than they are anywhere else and that under the new mayoral administration they're going to get even better as it work.

Speaker 5 00:04:08.550
Well you know I think one of the things that sustains people I think of this particularly with black people is hope.

Speaker 4 00:04:13.670
You know today can be very bad but tomorrow may be better. And this is how people live.

Speaker 7 00:04:19.790.0000000000291
Of course that's one of the things that we tap in any kind of mental health experience you you reach the person help him to realize that he is suffering but darn it there is something within him that wants to change to get better to become stronger. And there is that hope that can be tapped.

Speaker 3 00:04:37.160
And even though there's commercialism associated with big time sports when a New York Mets game at home from last place in July and practically win the World Series it does at least on a temporary basis revitalize a city.

Speaker 8 00:04:51.470
You notice that they have the final game. People say What's the score. I hope they win a straight talk to each other and smiled to each other.

Speaker 9 00:04:58.990
And it's this kind of experience that we don't have too often we have it say sometimes in great joy as you point out the Mets or the Knicks or the Jets or some sometimes Apollo moon shot when it first win a shot. But we also have it in general distress. For example I remember coming home from Harlem hospital the night when the blackout I talked to the family.

Speaker 5 00:05:19.790
They were neighbors.

Speaker 9 00:05:20.450
They were helping each other across the darkened streets and they were concerned. And also on the subway strike a few transit strike a few years ago picking up people on a call on the bus drivers. And in spite of the violence that occurs in big cities people weren't as afraid and people were not excessively violent. One to the other.

Speaker 3 00:05:38.990
Now having looked at the general mental health problem let's look at the department that you had a Department of Mental Health Mental Retardation. What specifically is the role of this very important department. The department is responsible for planning and supervising all community mental health services. That means services provided not in private practice by physicians but in the voluntary sector such as through any of the hospitals that you know to public hospitals municipal hospitals through the Bureau of Child Guidance the the prison mental health services an area that needs so much improvement. These are areas of our concern. We are also responsible for funding and for supervising services in community mental health centers. There are new approach toward service you know in the past we often had clinics Child Guidance clinics for example where a mother or father might come more often a mother and a psychiatrist would work with a child and a case occasionally might see that the mother and really the father. But that was it. The tendency now is to moving toward whole family units to absolute involvement a whole family and in the child's life so that services are much more geared toward working with schools toward working with preparing youngsters for employment toward looking at the whole world that a person lives in and the Community Mental Health Center movement has been in the forefront of this it says let's have services where people are let's not have everybody going down to mid Manhattan even though they live in Brooklyn. And our department has as it tries to plan services been very mindful of the fact that you have to have services where people are and better to be in their own neighborhoods and services also should have some relationship to the culture of people you know up until recently we've had very few programs either public programs or those run by nonprofit voluntary agencies that had Spanish speaking staff who were employed to carry on their services in Spanish. Now I can certainly think it's important for people to become assimilated or into a multi racial and multi-ethnic society.

Speaker 3 00:07:48.160
And yet you can't reach people unless you can communicate with them and obviously that's basic language and they have a problem you have to begin right where they are.

Speaker 6 00:07:55.360
Exactly how many such community mental health centers are there and well in the city there are only six community mental health centers that are funded with federal money but there are about five or six other programs very large programs that follow that same principle of having a range of services and that serve a population in a local community. And we are as a department are developing a plan. I suppose one might call it a master plan toward the establishment of a multiplicity of such services in communities. We're also very much involved with the fact that in the past people like myself and others who were professional people said this is what a program should be I'm going to set it up and went and tried to get the money and set it up. We didn't consult with too many people except other experts and we've realized now that I think the whole emphasis on community involvement that came to other fields long before a demand came to mental health was made in this and healthcare and healthcare was light. We realize now that you have to have people involved in making decisions about them selves and that they can be involved from so many ways of letting us know what needs are helping us develop programs. And as I say when I go to some of the meetings in our subregional planning groups we have one in every locality in the city every one of you divided the city into 50 neighborhoods. We have local planning groups they are working with us and I the other involvement is of course when it's time for us to point out to legislators that Mental Health Mental Retardation don't get much money.

Speaker 3 00:09:30.190
We have a constituency it's all been a bit on that door Albany and City Council and the Board of Estimate which was one of the things I was thinking about as you were talking you talked about city services and things that go on in the city I do know that some of the services have some relationship to state service that's rightly an area of mental retardation.

Speaker 6 00:09:52.930
Well not only mental retardation but the State Department of Mental Hygiene which is a statewide organization for a long time cared for people with chronic illness so that you're right in the mentally retarded who were severely ill were put off in the schools that we've heard so much about the Willowbrook and the state schools were operated by the state and then those people who had severe chronic illness psychosis you mentioned at the beginning where one loses one sense of reality. These people were put and I really say put they were put off shunted off into state hospitals. Now one of the problems was that these institutions were large. They were they really didn't have good staff well-trained staff. They didn't pay people well custodial and they weren't custodial and people got very little therapeutic therapy in the case of the mentally ill very little education in the case of the retarded and their massiveness just dehumanized people. But in addition there was another problem. These institutions were paid for 100 percent by the state and other services in the localities the clinics and the Child Guidance programs were paid for partly by the state and partly by the nonprofit agencies of the city. So there was sometimes a tendency to either shun people after the State of the state to discharge people early. The other thing that our department's been very actively involved in is administering a planning process that will lead to joint services. We call it unified services. What happens to a person shouldn't depend on who's paying the bills exactly right. It should not and there has been legislation passed this last year in fact New York City and our department was very active in drafting this called Unified services legislation which says that all of these various people the cities and the voluntary agencies in the state have got together get together and plan jointly to a unified services. And in addition there'll be some sharing of funding that won't say 100 percent here or 50 percent there. I'm excited about this because I think it is possible.

Speaker 3 00:11:48.580
It's absolutely a necessity but it does bring you into conflict. One of the political realities that when you have a bureaucratic agency with its own fund its own staff its own administration has a tendency to protect them. That all yes vested interests and our that that that's a barrier that is it's a practical barrier and I know that in New York City mayor beam is talking about dismantling some of what we call the super agent. That's right. The one in housing and the one in health services and possibly the one in hospitals. And I was wondering just what effect the proposed dismantling of Health Services Administration will have on mental health service.

Speaker 10 00:12:31.480
Well we'll have a very significant effect because the Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation is one of the components of the Health Services Administration along with the Health Department and the Comprehensive Health Planning Agency and the medical examiner's office and addiction services. Now all of these are related to health services and it's very important that they all coordinate their efforts but you know coordination doesn't necessarily come about just because we have a superstructure just because your order and it doesn't come about because you water it or because you have a superstructure. And I think that with the dismantling the our own Department of Mental Health Mental Retardation will assume some of the leadership and the autonomy that it had before and that it also will be able to continue to coordinate in the way that we had already begun to do on our own initiative. I would say that in the last year or two since I've been in the department I've noticed an increasing amount of coordination. I've not only noticed it but I've urged it and fortunately we've been able to get it done.

Speaker 3 00:13:29.620
The key as you were talking I was thinking about the human element in the administration. One reason why you have bureaucratese and bureaucratic regulations is to sort of guide the human element in a certain way and so frequently doesn't work because people just read the letter of the law. Whereas a good coordination involves people of similar professions communicating among themselves and being aware of this natural tendency to protect oneself. Because as I can see a state agency or a private agency trying to relate to each other on mental health it means maybe I have to stop doing a little of this and change my personnel to do that and it means a little bit of trouble and too frequently bureaucratic units don't deal with it.

Speaker 10 00:14:15.340
On the other hand as you suggest just bringing in a superstructure doesn't deal with it either yet you know on the other hand I had not only the greatest support but I had real freedom as a commissioner in the Department of Mental Health because the previous administrator of the Health Services Gordon Chase was the person who urged me to come into the city. I'd been in both private practice and in Community Psychiatry at Harlem for many years and of course as you know city jobs pay so much less than either of those and seem to have so many headaches. But I was urged to come in with the the off the promise that I would be able to carry out some of the criticisms that I'd been making from the other side and do something about responsibility.

Speaker 5 00:14:54.090
It's true.

Speaker 10 00:14:54.460
So I got support no question of that. And I also got from the administrator and the most recent administrator Gerald frugal a lot of backing up and fighting for what we wanted on the other hand. I have been in the field for a number of years and I think that with the kind of enriched department that we have now the we can go it alone. We have been the agency that always related to the State Department of Mental Hygiene the federal agencies and I think because we we bridge the gap between health and social service that it's all the more important that the Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation have its own identity. You know many of our services are health services many others we conduct jointly with the Board of Education the Office of Special Services for Children of the Department of Social Services. We bridge those we get we bridge that that gap that sometimes exists among the different human services agencies. Now philosophically I think it's so important to unite these and this is perhaps even more important than it is in physical health care. Fact you might be interested to know that some of the recent programs that we've established have been on that interagency basis about a year ago I set up a task force on children in the law.

Speaker 6 00:16:05.770
Yes those who come into our juvenile justice system get lost in mental health and cared for them. We know that youngsters maybe where it became pre delinquent delinquent and they ended up in state training schools and mental health hadn't paid any attention or the youngsters whose families had so many problems that they weren't able to give attention to the youngsters and they were judged by a court persons in need of supervision and they ended up in shelters or detention centers or parents who were ill and couldn't care for children.

Speaker 9 00:16:35.420
I worked for foster care agencies for so many years and saw how we were trying to make an effort to interest mental health clinics in those days they didn't care they didn't care now what they may care what they do and they are yes then just in sometimes in the past they didn't care because because things that seem so difficult you don't care to put them aside. Is that like if you don't do that really means you don't care.

Speaker 10 00:16:55.460
We've started in this year some 20 new programs for children and many of them are for just this kind of child who is at risk of coming into the care of the Family Court their day treatment programs where youngsters can go and get the educational services and the psychiatric and of health and work with the families and where they then can move back into a regular school setting or other residences where people can live when their families aren't able to care for them short term residences. Last week we opened up the office the Bureau of facilities and institutions the Department of Social Service operating a residence in Brooklyn. We're funding the mental health component and the Board of Education is putting some exciting experimental education there. That's an outgrowth of this task force and it's great to see a program started and started in such a beautiful building as as it was I went to this opening in Brooklyn about a week there is this in Brooklyn it's on hegemon Street in Brooklyn and it will work serve youngsters young girls from 13 to 16 who've come into the care of institutions because they there's nobody to supervise them and working with them for a short period of time getting to know them as individuals and then helping them either move home or to a group residents where they get a more intensive experience. And it's that kind of program development that I think has to be done on a coordinated basis. And yet I think we can do it and I think we're beginning beginning to the same kind of thing in alcoholism. I don't know if you know there's a mounting problem of alcoholism among children right as well as adolescents.

Speaker 11 00:18:24.370
Of course we own a drug drink culture. Try and all the role models are involved in it and it's easily accessible which becomes a significant mental health problem one of the things that I have observed is that as we move into the 70s the particularly thrust toward community involvement the recipient the consumer as it were gets more into you know how am I going to be served and why should I be served and then we get into a manpower problem in terms of what we call the traditional professionals that literally are not enough black or Hispanic psychiatrist enough psychiatrist periods and there's some new developments. Kohl professional power professionals what would you do whatever you want to call them. And I was wondering what your department has done in regard to this. Because as you describe all these fantastic programs I would see an army of psychiatrist and psychiatric social workers lined up to deal with them and I know that army doesn't exist.

Speaker 7 00:19:25.940
Yes well you know we've done a couple of things first of all we've looked at the actual need within a program psychiatrist are important social workers nurses but many other types of people are important.

Speaker 6 00:19:35.660
We've developed as you point out a new kind of helping person paraprofessional person. We have a job title called mental health worker. They're all what he was a city job title called community liaison worker. One thing our department has done is setup it over the past three years to experimental programs while experimental they're really pilot programs because in each of them people we would really rock or tease you have to differentiate experimental style.

Speaker 7 00:20:02.270
I think people my own efforts at Harlem had proved that you could take people average housewives people who'd been on welfare many men who'd been in prison and with hiring people first and training them both formally and on the job training help them become helping people either group leaders discussion leaders therapist therapeutic people advocates community organizers you could get skills people could learn skills and they could move up a career ladder. When I joined the department one of my criticisms had been that fine if it's great to have such a program at Harlem or at Lincoln Hospital but what happens if a person wants to go beyond those two or three innovative programs we need career ladders and we need horizontal mobility. The Department of Mental Health had already begun when I joined at eight a pilot program with some federal money in which it trained and hired 200 mental health workers people who became mental health workers and upgraded and almost another couple of hundred. In other words it didn't just say we're going to take people fresh out of the community. We're also going to take people who are in jobs as nurses aides not paid. Give them some upward mobility and we had a smaller program with all the cutbacks in federal funding this year. But there have been say some 400 people now who've ended into mental health careers through these two programs. And what we've been trying to do is in the other agencies with which we work to make sure that as new jobs the new and new programs are developed that they to build in opportunities for various kinds of mental health workers alcoholism programs have tended to employ ex alcohol alcoholics and addiction programs have tended to employ people who've had addiction as a problem. We think that's good. But you also have to add onto that the need for intensive training and the realization that just because someone's had a problem doesn't mean that that person is the best helper. But that's one model using the person who's had the problem himself another is using a person whose talents haven't been tapped. The thing we haven't done in which I think is so important and I hope as we move ahead that we will be able to work much more with the schools the junior high schools. You see many black and Hispanic youth get tracked out you know right away they're in school you go into what used to be the general programs you're never going to get to college or you're never going to get to a technical education that way. And I think we have to do much more education at a lower level. I speak often at junior high schools and schools and I realize high and high schools the need for us to really begin as people who are concerned with manpower at a very low level at lower educational level. Then the other thing is that we've got to influence some of our educational institutions to open up opportunities for people for example there are plenty of nurses aides in the state system. Some of them should be able to go to community colleges to get courses. Some of them should be able to go to the four year colleges and get the extension courses. So I think we have to change our educational system. And then of course those of us who were in the professional organizations have to get over our guild attitude you know keep him out keep him out keep that's a decent man and keep him few and keep keeping his high. That's right and keep the peace. I don't want it for example to develop that there's a danger in our training only mental health workers among blacks and Hispanics. We need the range. We need doctors we need administrators and people who are fiscally trained and skilled we need all of the technical and professional skills we can get.

Speaker 3 00:23:28.640
Of course the key to it is really what we try to do on social reason which is communication to let the community at large know that they are there all these needs all these opportunities and that they are ways of knocking down some of the barriers that we have seen in the past. And it's true if somebody really wanted to get into one of these professions there are enough opportunities now if they knocked hard on several doors to get there. What you are proposing is that our whole career education process should be one which opens up to people a variety of alternatives and let them know that every person has some type of talent some type of thing to give. It may not be a singing or an athletic or scientific talent but it's something that's out there to give and particularly in the world of the 1980s and the 1990s. The service occupations are helping people occupations are going to be a significant part of the labor market exactly as technical advances.

Speaker 7 00:24:30.890
Move move ahead so that machines can replace some things they'll never replace that human warmth that comes from one person helping another as a counselling person as a teacher as an advocate and I think that kind of human service career is an exciting one. There there though I've mentioned three or four.

Speaker 8 00:24:48.710
There are so many kinds of Human Services that particularly minority youth ought to be more and more interested in of course this suggests something maybe your department might want to take on is that they really need to be career education units within the larger bureaucratic standards because as a commissioner I think is fantastic. Did you go around junior high schools. But there you know 18000 junior high school exam around 2 and the kids who are fortunate enough to hear you or to be touched by you they're lucky or teach you is insightful enough to invite you but they really needs to be more in the way of coordinated plan.

Speaker 7 00:25:23.480
You've tampered with one of the directions that our manpower and training office has been urging us to go and I wholeheartedly support it.

Speaker 5 00:25:30.040
I believe you I. I'm glad that she's here right now.

Speaker 3 00:25:34.340
What about the public's reaction to mental health in general for example is a lot more outpatient clinics and everyone wants to while you read in the paper that some community is protesting an outpatient clinic near them. Yes I'm sure you must have been involved in some.

Speaker 7 00:25:48.950
Yes I think there has been an increased awareness of the need for service and an increasing acceptance accept that I think people are saying we don't want services dumped on us. We want to have some say about them. I went recently to a small community in Queens which had had a lot of trouble and had a program moved from one place to another recall that. It worked in the second community because the service was planned with people and they knew more about it. But again here's an area where we've got to be more on top of things in terms of mental health education. We've got to let people know that mentally ill people are people and that most of them are not going to do the horrible violent things that we fear. On the other hand we have also got to have some effect on the planning agencies in the city so that restrictive legislation doesn't pass and we just recently testified before the City Planning Commission saying Great let's make sure that communities such as Far Rockaway and Staten Island aren't flooded with nursing homes without service. But let's also make sure that we build in a process where we and other departments help services be planned so that people who do move into homes will have those services and not just be sitting there vegetated.

Speaker 3 00:26:56.740
I think that generally people as people are responsive to the need to help other people and in the business of a place like New York City in big bureaucracies we have someone will sit behind a chair with a map and say we're going to do this here and there.

Speaker 8 00:27:14.070
And I think the thing that people like you in your role as a commissioner are doing is to increasingly impress upon the technocrats the technicians the bureaucrats on the need to really allow the human element the community element to come in to the planning and the execution of services. To me I think that's the greatest breakthrough we've made in our health services.

Speaker 7 00:27:39.060
I'm very excited about that we've this month had large meetings involving people in each one of the boroughs that focused just on that where people have said to us this is what we want and this is how we want to get there with you.

Speaker 8 00:27:49.680
Well I think from the various things you've told us tonight that we can see that the Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation is in the hands of dynamic leadership which is a way of the kind of things that we need to deal with. And I'd like to thank you Dr. June Jackson Christmas commissioner of the Department of Mental Health Mental Retardation of New York City for being with us on tonight soul of reason.

Speaker 6 00:28:13.710
Thanks so much I enjoyed it.

Speaker 12 00:28:15.630
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Art for one hour week on affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Radio Bumper Intro 00:28:30.110
Soul of reason is produced by the NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

