Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.620
May 22nd 1974 was the 20th anniversary of the publication of John Killens' historic novel "Youngblood." Hear John Killens discuss Black writing today and yesterday on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:36.521
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:02.861
The month of May in 1974 was historic in many ways. On one hand, it celebrated the 20th anniversary of the Brown case decision that led to the--at least legal--elimination of racial segregation in the public schools. And on the other case, in the world of literature, May 22nd 1974 represented the 20th anniversary of the publication of a novel by a great Black novelist who is our guest tonight: John Killens. I'm glad to have you with us tonight on "Soul of Reason," John.

John Killens 00:01:33.641
It's always good to be on the program with you, Roscoe.

00:01:36.191
Well let's talk about really what has happened in those 20 years what has happened to John Collins what has happened to black writing and what in a sense has happened to black people in general. Well I think a lot of things have happened but the fresh air we're seeing the more things change the more they remain the same. And that's almost the way I see it. I think the most important thing is that black people began to move not so much that the establishment has relented in its persecution of black people. Black people have begun to move the Sixties into the 50s and the 60s. In 1955 or 56 I think it was when this little black woman in Alabama says she was tired tired of standing up and said I mean I think that literally metaphorically she me she was tired and so tired of the whole thing and that set off a chain reaction and moved towards the whole civil rights movement towards a black power move towards a citizen's freedom set for black people in motion that was most important thing. These last 20 years I think much of the literature reflected that.

Speaker 5 00:02:51.280
Now young blood when it came out received a variety of critical acclaim some saying it was too angry some saying it didn't really represent the world the way it really is and of course we know if anything it might have been an understatement of the way the world really is.

Speaker 6 00:03:06.160
And the thing that new John Killen's have done is to sort of set a standard for literary expression of black people and through your teaching as well as through your various lectures et cetera. You have communicated to black people who want to write all over this country.

Speaker 7 00:03:26.080
Some of the things about our experience and write about our experience which then leads me to say or to ask what has happened since this period of the late 60s where probably more black writing more black poetry more black short stories were published than in any period in history.

Speaker 3 00:03:46.990
What really has happened to black writing hasn't become more strident. Has it become less strident has become better. Has the quality been attenuated by the fact that there's so many black people writing now.

Speaker 4 00:04:00.190
Well I think that the writing has become more mature in many cases. I think that reflects the maturity of black people sometimes is not as strident. But I don't think a strident strategy necessarily means a revolutionary. You know that's a very good point. I think we've confused ourselves by thinking that the more you write scream and shout it the more revolutionary he was. In my classic at how universal in the first place I tell my students it should be clear that the rap revolution is over. Well very good way of putting the rap revolution is over it's over you know and now we had settled down to work and that's what Douglas meant when he said Without struggle there is no progress.

Speaker 8 00:04:48.580
And of course the thing that's so interesting is that in the first days of the real strident period 65 66 67 in a sense it was a cry out of black people both to relieve some of the agony but also to cry out to white people say look we really are mad about this and you don't listen to us when we talk in simple language. So we going to talk to you in a way that you just can't help but listen to us. And now even though the system hasn't really changed very much it is true that significantly larger numbers of white people politicians corporate executives are listening. Well they are listening to the extent of doing anything. At least they're listening no longer to get turned off. Which then means that what you write about and what you speak about in the way you write it has to get on a communications line where at least people can understand what you're coming from other than just the anger and the anguish of your experience is I think we moved from demonstrating in the streets to a political level this term use.

Speaker 4 00:05:50.570
You see the many election of blacks to the Legislatures the mayors of various cities. I think the most significant election was in Detroit Michigan. That's right where black ex Labor leader became mayor of Detroit Michigan that's the center of this country's power.

Speaker 8 00:06:10.160
And interestingly enough on a relatively moderate platform yes did speak against police abuse and brutality and so on. But basically his platform was reasonably moderate and whereas Detroit does have a large number of blacks. It did require a significant number of white votes to get elected which does mean that there is some political maturity at least both among black people and among some white people. But now how is this change this reflective ness this analysis that's more mature revolution being reflected in the themes of black writing. Because as we look at the late 60s many of the themes were burn baby burn or burn whitey or dealing with the exorcism that black people went through looking at their slave experience I get our experience what are some of the themes now that are emerging.

Speaker 9 00:07:05.780
Well I could see one theme of very powerful point. It was written by Mary Evans I don't know if you know porn was to say speak the truth to the people.

Speaker 10 00:07:17.330
Yes I know the price of power beautiful for them was a revolutionary point because you say cut out the nonsense speak the truth to the people the truth will set people free.

Speaker 11 00:07:28.780
And of course one of the problems is it's with the complexities of the racism and the elite ism in our society.

Speaker 8 00:07:36.890
The question is what really is the truth. For example in the late 60s in particular was a heavy stream of black nationalism but things that would work if they were complete control completely and only by blacks.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:52.130
Whereas some of the writing now is beginning to reach out into the third world type of coalitions or coalitions across class lines and things of this type.

Speaker 8 00:08:02.390
Now as you look at the works that are coming out remembering that a good amount of the writing in the late 60s was poetry I get the impression that now we're getting more short stories and more novels. And of course some of the great plays by some of our great young black playwrights. So how do you see this as this being reflected in this way.

Speaker 10 00:08:29.630
Yeah well I think I hope you're right about that the novel is come into its own because I heard a friend of mine say at the symposium at Columbia that the novel was dying but would people establishment people have been known as the death of the novel for a hell of a long time and now seems to be still in good shape. And I think he has a long life I hope so because that's my primary interest in the novel I think the novel is the freest form of expression and in the novel you have opportunity to see people develop and grow and you have an opportunity also to explore the complexities of the society in which we live. And I think that is very difficult to capture in a point.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:21.060
It's interesting you said the novel is probably most effective way of expression.

Speaker 3 00:09:24.830
And as you were saying as I was saying it's also the hardest thing to write and I mean it might well be that the explosion of poetry is as easy and relatively easy that is to sit down and dash off a poem of your feelings and even fairly easy to put together a pretty good short story a little bit more difficult a television script when you get into films that novels and I know you've done some work in writing film scripts and my own personal smears gets into that area too.

Speaker 12 00:09:55.640
That really is a toughie because you're trying to pull together this character development which you do in words in a novel and you're doing in a combination of words and action and a film pictures and that the filmmaking is a particular area of expertise. I think it does in the sense transcend the novel in some ways. But speaking of your own work recently past three years I guess it is.

Speaker 3 00:10:24.350
You wrote a novel which was almost autobiographical of many black people. The cotillion which got a tremendous play and I understand that you were working on a musical version of that what really has happened with that project. In retrospect what were some of the reactions to this because this looked at another theme and I think it's going to come through black writing is it we're looking at ourselves as families as people we are not necessarily looking at ourselves always in juxtaposition to whites or in juxtaposition to our press position vs Ivy white.

Speaker 10 00:11:00.610
Well it's always been my contention that black people need a face to deal with themselves as Don Lee say when integration with the need to integrate with each other. You know in the first instance before we were about integrating with the larger white society and beginning with young blood young blood was about a black family in the Deep South. Of course you had to put them in the context of this white hostile society which they lived where they were fighting for their dignity but. Most and Sippy was a family no homo. I've always been interested in the black family because I think that's the focal point of the Black nation if you will. And I think Black Nation who it contradicts and identification with the so-called Third World which I prefer to call the first world I can't see why we should give ourselves look good to us to the third class citizenship in the world. You know we got to find a new name for ourselves. I would say that I think we the first world people says even the most racist anthropologists admit that man first alone is two feet in Africa and certainly some of the oldest civilization came from Asia and that rise is the pleasing thing and then unique it is that's where it started. So that I call the First World people I know you're talking about and I don't think black nationalism conflicts with the whole idea of first world people. Last summer I spent three weeks in China. I don't know if you knew that. No I wasn't aware of that tremendous experience. You know when those first world people we we traveled through about 70 Chinese cities. You know I found that three through my books had been published there included including yo blood and thunder and lightning is burned.

Speaker 8 00:12:55.540
You know that's gratifying and interesting it is. And of course since those people have been going through a struggle to against imperialism and oppression there's much to identify in those common experiences.

Speaker 12 00:13:11.260
But again as we extend this in terms of the reaction to a novel I can tell you some people have said well maybe it's a little frivolous for us to think about things like this. On the other hand it might be suggested that this is part of our reality and if we don't look at our reality and understand what it means and even get some humor out of it because I found personally today to be a fantastically humorous book because I literally incent new people I know people who reflect that particular experience I ever had people to talk to tell me they were sitting on the bus and people take them to Bellevue because they were laughing and laughing.

Speaker 13 00:13:52.960
But I had about the same experience had a good time with the book.

Speaker 14 00:13:56.340
You know I think that that's one of the things that has helped us to survive in this hostile country is our ability to laugh. It's can be a revolutionary weapon to laugh.

Speaker 10 00:14:09.970
Langston Hughes called laughing to just to keep from crying you know and the humor has always been and can be a lethal weapon against oppression. George Bernard Shaw was it was a humorous but he was tremendous. Indict tide of the society.

Speaker 8 00:14:29.170
It's interesting as you mentioned I was just thinking about it another form of humor namely satire actually. As I reflect on black writing we really haven't done that much in the way of satire. Probably one thing that comes to mind is Doug Ward's uh Day of Absence. That's that's a form of satire. Mr. Holmes is done. Yeah. Yeah.

Speaker 8 00:14:54.160
I was I think as I was reviewing at my mind he's done something with that. Is that a function of possibly was just being so angry or is it a function of the fact that we really feel that we have to say it in more explicit terms.

Speaker 14 00:15:10.930
Well I think it's it's a it reflects the fact that we felt the need to scream at white people. Well I think after a while it upset white people. Well that's why people got bored.

Speaker 15 00:15:25.460
That's right. They don't even listen to you.

Speaker 14 00:15:27.020
Yeah. So what else is new. You know so that the thing that the reason that I wrote a book like cotillion although it was time for us to look at ourselves and look at our whole middle class foibles because most black people had bought the whole American dream the whole thing and bought it just as much as middle class white people.

Speaker 8 00:15:52.420
As a matter of fact the market research indicated that black people in general tend to use more of the name brand plant brands of various products than white people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:03.530
Very name brand conscious because of the identification the brand identifies with them with the mean mainstream society. Tonight on solid reason we are talking with John killings the famous novelist and we're reflecting on black writing spanning a period from his book Young Blood which was published in May of 1954 right to the present.

Speaker 3 00:16:26.130
And one of the things I want to ask you John tonight is what are some of your contemporary projects.

Speaker 10 00:16:31.370
What are some of the things that you are working on now or thinking about getting into was as you pointed out and just completed adaptation of the novel cotillion for a Broadway musical and Smokey Robinson and will it hurt you in doing the music. That's fantastically we expect to go on the road sometime in the fall and probably come into New York beginning of the winter they've January. It looks like a good project.

Speaker 16 00:16:57.860
You know we have talked on solid reason with many people in the black theater about some of the problems are getting financial support from the black community for various plays musicals relating to the black experience. What has been your experience in regard to getting the telethon together.

Speaker 14 00:17:16.880.0000000001164
Well musical we a lot of problems but at the present time looks like the back end is coming from Motown. Berry Gordy and who seems to have quite a bit of money you know and also it's a good time because the record and the musical output that's a concern that Smokey Smokey vice president is Motown. You know sometimes they call of the poet the musical point of the black experience because of the many songs that he's written.

Speaker 17 00:17:43.010
He's a great lyricist and a great musician. Weeks he called me the other day and said that he had written some dynamite music as a man. Prove it and prove it that it let me hear it telling me. He said Well in a couple of weeks he's gone into the studio and tape and he's going to call me and flying out and we sit and listen to it.

Speaker 13 00:18:01.510
OK well that really is a test in the feel of the arts. The test is the work you produce and what you say about it.

Speaker 9 00:18:07.610
Yes you can talk about it afterwards but until it's done you wouldn't write a musical so you have to put the two things together you'd only have a musical play unless you get to you get the music. I've done the adaptation I had to cut. From 150 pages to 85 pages because of demand of theater and the musical was tough job did it.

Speaker 10 00:18:29.050
But we'll talk about a couple of other things which disturb me. The trend of the writing. I was looking at a book deal of the day was so-called progressive liberal white man is talking about Crispus Attucks talking about the school. He said this nigger school out in Jersey called Crispus Attucks and he said it easily you know as if he had the right to say it and then he didn't expect anybody to challenge. And I think we have we have contributed to that in the 60s without having an historic sense of his style continuity. We heard the word nigger spoken by black people tell these so-called militants you know and always rejected it because I think the word nigger has been the the pretense and the the use made of the word to justify the enslavement and the colonized most of the world everywhere Western man when he forged men into niggers.

Speaker 15 00:19:30.330
Yeah it's it's a derogatory term and derogatory concept and matter of fact they've even been books written about the student as a nigger or the woman as a nigger. It's a derogatory concept in that sense.

Speaker 5 00:19:42.050
On the other hand I guess what might be suggested is that in the family as it were one can call oneself that I personally have some some problems with that because on the one hand having lived in the black community this is something that one does to oneself. But the question that I think you're raising is whether or not this is something that we should throw out to the world and certainly whether we should accept it when it is used by white people as well as by some black people in the raising the question of whether we should use it all to talk to each other among ourselves. It's not done in my house my kids were not used to it. But when my daughter with the Fisk University she came to me one day with tears in her eyes you see what's the matter with this. These girls in my dorm to a desert with his tongue was said the password as a nigger ain't shit. Wow. I. She said What does it mean. I say it means that a couple of decades of passed as I was on the college campus and the slogan hasn't changed. Not even grammatically you know.

Speaker 9 00:20:44.040
And of course the feeling behind it is the thing that that is feeling with it is a kind of a debilitating thing that even Louise said affectionately. It means if you hear people say niggers English get together magazine or do this as what we say among each other I think it is defeated us from doing many things that we have to do.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:04.860
I think that's an interesting point because many of us in the movement went through the argument about Negro and black.

Speaker 5 00:21:12.190
Yeah but that really represents a different level of the continuum. Black guy is a description of the color spectrum society in terms of our color system assigned to us and has become the basis of pride in the fact that black was supposed be bad and whites must be good. Now you know if white is good though is black good. Yeah well that's a different different contexts.

Speaker 9 00:21:40.950
As regarding I used to like a dry nigger Rice were black but I don't fight people who use the word Negro because after all is the Spanish term for black and I can't see us preferring the English version to the Spanish voters. So you know what's the big deal.

Speaker 13 00:21:56.520
Well eventually it gets into a politically they say what is Negro.

Speaker 9 00:22:01.260
Look at what nation is Negro what nation is this. I don't know of any country named Black either you know but a negro is a Spanish term for black is the connotations to put on it's the connotations that put on a time when it comes to political. I find no need to clean up the word nigger to or to use it. It doesn't ever occur to me that think of a black person we were in a panel discussion. I was on a panel discussion with Chinua Achebe and I said that brothers we had to make up our mind well we are. Jeb is brother Well we are the white man's definition of us. Jeb is not a nigger. He is a black man in Africa. That's quite different from being a nigger you know.

Speaker 10 00:22:41.430
And I just I think this this word has kept us from doing a lot of things. It's it's it's very uh as I say debilitating the subtle way. You know we don't even know it's happening where we say. It is Anglo do this.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:02.040
Of course you are taking the role of a writer of a novel. You're looking at the meaning of words.

Speaker 12 00:23:09.180
And this raises another interesting question which has been brought up many times dealing with black writing and some of the so-called modern American white writing that is the excessive use of obscenities and profanities. It might be alleged that in writing about black families if in fact they use nigger in their interaction one should use that in one's writing. Similarly if they use a certain levels of obscenities or profanities despite the popular expression expletive deleted the fact is that this is the way many people talk. How do you respond to this as a writer. I'm not talking about whether you necessarily would use it or not but how do you respond to this particular argument.

Speaker 10 00:23:52.830
Well I would respond to in this way that is the icy response but the writer is odd should also teach. I don't I wouldn't tell you that though you will. You can look through my novel will find the word nigger but you also put in in context and the character who uses the word as a cat who who is using the villainous Jew. And it's very clear that that's not the author talking it is different when it's so so is the context in which you put it. It would be cleaning up the south of I would say that why people didn't use the word nigger in continue. You'll find later Daphne using the word she's she's proclaimed Bashir no African.

Speaker 17 00:24:34.560
Yeah she wouldn't have to answer it you know.

Speaker 9 00:24:37.860
And if you if you read the book her daughter said all right Mom if you want to be a nigger instead of Africans okay with me you know yeah I recall. So so it is the way you use it you know. And the context no I wouldn't deny that black people don't call themselves that but takes responsibility of a writer not only to reflect life but to interpret it.

Speaker 12 00:25:01.920
You made a telling point earlier you said that art should teach and this is something that I know some painters some musicians some playwrights etc. tend to reject they say art should reflect the way in which I feel about my interaction with my environment my experience. And you're taking a position which some novelists in particular take namely that art is a form of interpretation and analysis of the society.

Speaker 7 00:25:37.450
Some of us even go so far as to say art is the conscience of a society.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:42.490
How do you balance that with this creative drive that causes one to want to express in the graphic art and music and dance. What have you.

Speaker 10 00:25:53.830
Well first of all I think that there is no such thing as this western myth of art for art's sake as a myth. There's no basis in fact I think all art is propaganda although all propaganda is not art. We could different appreciate it there by the same token.

Speaker 18 00:26:15.760
I don't see any contradiction in the creative act and interpretation.

Speaker 9 00:26:26.590
For example I have been pretty pretty disturbed by the if the flock of moves have come out recently like Superfly. Sweet sweet sweet baby bass so even Cheshire which I thought was a better song but because I think it does change black people's image of themselves you know you go for the circus streets you see black dudes with the big pimp hats and built in plus side boys LeBron down and how he has slipped as you know down the avenue you know we've been done in by the movie industry and because it's done intentionally so and we've helped to do it right.

Speaker 15 00:27:14.020
That's right. We subsidized it. We helped to do it to ourselves and cause this has to do with the hunger I think for black people to see black images and it's unfortunate that in seeking for this in some instances the black images weren't as positive as they might be.

Speaker 9 00:27:27.910
What was he heard is that in those days and how can teach his book and the preacher and preach entertain it was funny but it taught history the history the extra dusters who went West seeking land you see without which no nation can be built. It also shows some African culture where they were discouraging one more want to turn back they went to their elders you know for advice and the father advisor is a beautiful film. This is kind of film I would like to see.

Speaker 15 00:27:55.960
And of course John Collins are a great teacher our guest on tonight soul of reason has been John Collins the well-known novelist. And we're glad to have talk with you tonight about black writing today and yesterday. Thank you.

Speaker 19 00:28:09.040
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host but director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:23.590
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

