Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.390
There are 500,000 residents of the South Bronx. The South Bronx Economic Development Corporation has influenced 20 million dollars worth of business in the South Bronx. Here, John Patterson Junior, President of the South Bronx Economic Development Corporation discuss the work of this important organization on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:42.430
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:09.060
Now with us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is John Patterson Jr., who is president of the South Bronx Economic Development Corporation. Glad to have you with us tonight, John.

John Patterson Jr. 00:01:18.701
Glad to be here, Dr. Brown.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:18.707
Since economy is the number one topic in New York City--particularly the fiscal condition of New York City--and since the South Bronx with so many black and Puerto Rican residents has problems that are probably larger than those in the city, I think it's important that we talk about what you and the corporation are doing to try to move the South Bronx ahead. So could you tell us exactly what the origin of the South Bronx Economic Development Corporation was, and what you have accomplished in the few years that you've been around?

John Patterson Jr. 00:01:53.770
Well about five years ago a number of the local people in the South Bronx--both the political leadership and the community leadership and some of the business people--saw early on that the city and of course then the South Bronx was moving in a downward spiral and that people were losing a lot of jobs and companies were leaving and therefore jobs were leaving. And that group got together and organized the corporation that I'm president of, called the South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation. And the sole and express purpose of that was to revitalize the economy of the Bronx. Of course, that's probably one of the most difficult jobs in the world, as you pointed out...the South Bronx has a population more than many cities in the entire United States has. And that population is for the most part representative of the poorest population of any burrow in the city of New York. The average income is about three to five thousand dollars a year, per family, less than the best average income or the other lowest average income anywhere in the city. The incidence of poor health, criminal activity, et cetera for the South Bronx is the worst of any place in the city. But the South Bronx OEDC started out with the express purpose of trying to revitalize the economy. And the thinking there was that if we could get more money circulating throughout the community more people working than it would have some positive effect upon the other negative features that usually accompany a poor community.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:44.340
I think your analysis or your description of the South Bronx is both very accurate but also very heart-rending, because the Bronx of course is one of the oldest boroughs of New York City. It has been the birthplace and the community in which people of many different backgrounds--English, Irish, Italian, German--have grown up. It's been the home of the Bronx Bombers as it were, the New York Yankees, and has really been a significant part of the economy. And then what has happened is that as these older homes have been abandoned by these many generations of European immigrants, and the residents are now black and Puerto Rican, the overall economy and even just the care of the buildings and the way in which public services are provided has slid downhill. And particularly with so many of the residents being Spanish speaking and not having access to the usual means of communication and influence, you really have a very difficult situation. So if I were in your place I would say to myself, "Gee where do I begin?" And knowing John Patterson, that's exactly what you did do, so could you tell us how you began and what thrust you are trying to put together to influence this situation? Which I think is really socially immoral situation, in that the leaders of our city have allowed this to happen. But I think it's a breath of fresh air that the people who live there are organizing themselves to fight back.

John Patterson Jr. 00:05:23.320
Not many people know, Roscoe, that as you pointed out the Bronx was--back some 50 or 75 years ago--the richest borough in the city of New York. And the wealthy people in the city lived in the Bronx at one point, and that was the suburbs of Manhattan and there were a number of factories and other things that used all of the resources-- waterways and highways, et cetera--in the Bronx that made it not only the wealthiest borough but at the same time the most job-producing borough. And as you point out, the trend has gone downhill ever since. It has been the gateway for immigrants. Now that the immigrants have changed--both [in] their complexion and their language from white European to, in this instance, Hispanics from the Caribbean or black immigrants from the South--these economic things have come about and they've been quite negative. We reason that because the Bronx, or the South Bronx in this particular instance, had not enjoyed favorable images...a favorable image in the mind of the public. If you think hard and carefully, you'll realize that every story that you read about the South Bronx almost without exception has been a very negative story. So that...we reason to start with that, in order for us to begin to do anything about revitalizing the area, we had to try to do some things to change that image. And we did a number of things in that area. One was to highlight the fact that as in any other poor, poverty stricken community there are the positives as well as the negatives. There are thousands of respectable, responsible families that go to work every day from the South Bronx as from every other poor community. There are thousands of family units that are not into crime or not burning buildings or not mugging or whatever the headline stories usually are. So that we started out on a whole campaign just attempting to galvanize that group of responsible productive individuals, making sure that they got as much of a spotlight about their contributions to the community being stable, as it is, as the negative elements in the community did. And that was one aspect of it, but deeper to that point was that we knew that unless we changed the images of the Bronx for a positive way, economics...just would not take hold there. Another thing we did for example we pioneered in something that now has become used all around the city and in many instances in some other states. Your listeners will notice that on the yellow taxi cabs and on the gypsy taxi cabs and on even the buses now, there's a shield that indicates that that bus and that cab is part of a radio motor patrol project. Well we implemented that, initiated that, in the Bronx and we had a twofold reason in this instance. We knew that we had to cut down on not only the incidence of crime but the perceptions by the public about how much crime existed in the area. And therefore we felt this...civilian radio motor patrol project would actually cut down on crime and would give people the feeling that they were safer because the cars were plugged into the police station and the police could respond much more quickly to a problem of crime or of an emergency situation than if someone had to go and telephone the police et cetera et cetera.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:17.090
You know it's interesting...as you started to talk about something that you had done that would affect the whole city, in my own mind that's exactly the project I thought of. In other words, you have accomplished the purpose. If your objective was to improve the image and to show us in positive things as a citizen of New York City...I was able to identify even before you told me that this particular project emanated from the South Bronx and I was admiring as I was driving around just yesterday and I saw this in operation that this was really a good idea. It helps to give the law abiding citizens a chance to protect themselves and as you say it tends to give it just a general image of the fact that we are concerned because it's certainly true. I think when we had Arthur Bonds from the New York Urban Coalition on the program a few weeks ago talking about crime in Harlem and it's certainly true that black people don't want, or Hispanic people don't want, crime anymore so than anybody else.

John Patterson Jr. 00:10:16.441
Exactly.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:17.190
And unfortunately much of the crime in these minority communities are committed against minority people, by minority people.

John Patterson Jr. 00:10:24.242
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:25.291
Not because of any basic propensity for blacks and Puerto Ricans to be criminal, but because economic conditions.

John Patterson Jr. 00:10:32.070
And we're just begging to be ripped off, that's all...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:33.513
And what you're pointing up is this balance.

John Patterson Jr. 00:10:35.951
Exactly.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:36.810
I think that's very very important. As a matter of fact it's probably as important as getting together to mobilize the business community to keep business in the South Bronx and to bring more money into the South Bronx.

John Patterson Jr. 00:10:49.650
And I also think it's something that the city fathers, if you would, should recognize more and that is: very often a number of positive, creative things come out of the so-called "ghettos," that benefit the entire city or benefit the entire system. And we have a slogan which we used when we brought out our last company's annual report and it was: "Can The South Bronx Save New York?" And our thinking was that because the South Bronx is so basic and so fundamental to all of the problems that are going on in the city of New York, that if we--the South Bronx residents and institutions there--and if the city fathers, who have a degree of influence on the kinds of resources that come into that area, if we concentrate on solving those serious problems...then the much less serious problems that the city has in balancing its budget, et cetera, will automatically be solved. And to reverse that of course I think it could be safely said that the city of New York will not solve its fundamental problems unless it solves its constituent problems in the Bed-Stuys and in the South Bronxes and in the Harlems because these are the nonproductive drains. We have a city...we had a city administrator, the head of one of the important agencies called...his name was Roger Starr, and he had the audacity to make the statement that the South Bronx should be allowed to shrink away to oblivion. That they should and that they should pull back on the services of police and fire and housing so that the residences people would not be attracted to moving to the South Bronx and then let the South Bronx kind of die on its own.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:51.570
So that certainly is a self-defeating strategy.

John Patterson Jr. 00:12:53.521
It's absolutely self-defeating.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:54.073
It's one that you have to work against. Well specifically what are some of the things you're doing in the corporation now?

John Patterson Jr. 00:12:58.350
Well, we do a number of things. Again our major point is to make sure that businesses and industries stay in the area so that the jobs that our our people work at don't take off and go to Connecticut or Mississippi or some other state where it's much more attractive. So that we do a number of things to make sure that they stay, we provide them with trained personnel that we help train or help them to get government funds for training and we also help them get through the red tape that the city has...unfortunately everyone has to go through to make sure that they stay in business. At this point in time, I'd like to get into some more specific details about what we do and if we can hold that for a minute.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:53.580
All right. One of things that we do have on radio programs is time, and we are reaching toward the end of this segment of our program. And I would like to give the audience your phone number: 292-3113. That's the South Bronx Economic Development Corporation. And those listeners who want to know more about this organization should call 292-3113. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is John Patterson Jr., who is President of the South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation. John, could you tell us a little bit more now about the specific things that the South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation [is doing]? I like that idea.

John Patterson Jr. 00:14:41.160
We have two very large projects that we feel when they blossom will cause the area of the South Bronx itself to blossom. I think many of your readers have heard...listeners have heard about the industrial park, the 100-acre industrial park that has been in the process of developing now for the past three years. South Bronx OEDC has been in the forefront of pulling that together. There was a front page story about a year ago that indicated that an Italian developer, Renzo Zingone ,had entered into an agreement with the city to develop and invest in that 100-acre park. That project is moving along if it goes through as we plan it to. It will generate some up to 4500 new, fresh skill level jobs for residents of the area. It will also bring some 50-plus million dollars in capital into the area. Now as you know Roscoe, when you get an industrial park project of this nature going not only does it benefit those factories or industries or businesses right there but it has a kind of spillover effect so that local businesses that are in the neighborhood when the people get paid on Friday and go out and do their shopping and buy some lunch and buy some candies and other things, that spills over into the neighborhood so that...whereas the 50-million capital investment will be for starters. We're projecting that four times that much will be the benefit on a kind of annual basis...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:31.311
...like a multiplier effect.

John Patterson Jr. 00:16:32.251
...immense multiplier effect.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:34.580
Now where is this park gonna be located physically in the South Bronx?

John Patterson Jr. 00:16:36.511
That's.. .that's right at the southern tip of the Bronx, where the Bronx joins with Manhattan at the Triborough Bridge. It kind of overlooks...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:47.130
That's a good area for a park like that...

John Patterson Jr. 00:16:47.580
Randall Island is...

00:16:49.021
...you have

John Patterson Jr. 00:16:49.023
good transportation. Absolutely perfect area. And the project going off successfully will mean that it will be the first major such park done in the metropolitan area...in any recent time.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:00.421
By the way, for our audience's edification maybe you should describe the concept of an industrial park. Many of us who are around business don't know this...

John Patterson Jr. 00:17:09.461
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:10.021
... easily. But it's an interesting idea...

John Patterson Jr. 00:17:11.880.0000000001164
and well...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:11.882.0000000001164
... an industrial park.

John Patterson Jr. 00:17:12.691
It's probably a good idea to do it for any New Yorker because you don't usually see industrial parks in in the metropolitan New York area. A person who runs a manufacturing company will be quick to tell you that in order for them to make whatever they're making and make it efficiently and hire as many people as they can, they have to stretch out as opposed to stretching up. And in New York of course most things have been stretched up. Going up to five stories, eight stories, 16 stories high.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:45.110
And that's really very inefficient in terms of some of the means of production...

John Patterson Jr. 00:17:46.290
...and it's very inefficient for manufacturing. So that...an industrial park has the buildings and the factories kind of stretched out horizontally--two stories, three stories at the most--with attractive environment in between with park benches and grass and some trees and other amenities, if you will, for the employees that work there. But it also makes it possible for a factory to--or several factories a number of factories--to more efficiently produce and that of course is the key. Because when a factory owner knows that he can more efficiently produce, he will bring his factory there. And when he brings his factory there we get what we're interested in which are the jobs for our people. So that one of the reasons that we pioneered this particular project was that we knew we had to attract businesses to New York. Every other day the papers will tell you how many businesses have left New York. And we feel that local organizations like our's and the city itself now has to turn that around and begin attracting businesses...and also holding them, incidentally.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:00.060
Well what are some of the kind of businesses that would come into the industrial park?

John Patterson Jr. 00:19:03.540
Well, they would range from light--what would be called light manufacturing, and I contrast that with...it would probably...would certainly not be an automobile manufacturing company, which would be considered heavy manufacturing, but it could be...In fact there was a article in today's "Times" about two toy manufacturing companies that have found and considered the South Bronx to be among all the possible places on the eastern seaboard the best place for their businesses. And these are businesses that do upwards of 40 million dollars a year in sales and have upwards of several hundred thousand square feet of space that they operate their businesses from and who hire upwards of 1000 people each. They have determined that the South Bronx is the best for their businesses. So it would be those kinds of businesses.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:01.090
Now that's interesting in terms of that determination. Is it because there are a large number of people of Puerto Rican background who have the...from their culture have skills in terms of working with small objects, or is it because there's just a lot of people there, is it because there are a lot of young people there, because people live close to the factory, or what are some of those...?

John Patterson Jr. 00:20:20.850
It's a combination of all those things. Any employer of where he manufactures and needs a lot of people needs to have what he calls a large and ready and available labor pool. New York City has been historically known for that. The subways has been the most important thing for employers going primarily because it meant low cost transportation for a large number of people to get to wherever they worked so that...that still holds true, particularly the South Bronx. So you've got a large number of people, easily available ready to get there. But more importantly---and the boss, the employer, looks at this also--he has to have transportation for getting his product in or out of the factory and getting his supplies in the factory. So that when you have waterways, which we have of course in Manhattan and the Bronx, and when you have the excellent roadways that we have that can take a product all over the United States just from the plant in the Bronx, and when you have the airports right near this industrial park...these are considered ideal things for a factory to have and therefore New York has not really merchandised, has not really sold, all of these positive qualities the way they should. And I think the way they will.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:50.590
One thing I've heard that has deterred some corporations from staying in New York is the presence of unions which tend to raise the employment rate, which is probably good for the salaries, but also because the pensions and the like have a lot of fringes that make it difficult to do business in New York. A lot of people say that they just have difficulty doing business. Another part of it is the trucks: the trucks don't have any place to park, getting tickets, et cetera. Now one thing that the industrial park would do of course would be to eliminate the parking problem...

John Patterson Jr. 00:22:21.841
--exactly.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:22.351
...in a sense and provide some aggregation of business resources.

John Patterson Jr. 00:22:27.551
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:27.991
So in that sense it's positive. And I gather from what you're saying is that you really do think it's going to be successful.

John Patterson Jr. 00:22:33.570
I think it will. I think the city and certainly the South Bronx has no other alternative but to begin doing very large scale innovative kinds of things like an industrial park. We have another project of similar magnitude called a shopping center mall.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:49.941
Oh, very good.

John Patterson Jr. 00:22:50.611
And that's...many of your listeners know that there's an area in the South Bronx called The Hub. It's at 149th Street and Third Avenue and it's probably one of the busiest areas or it's...I know it to be the fifth busiest area in the entire city of New York in terms of transportation and commercial activity. Times Square and 34th Street being one and two in that respect. The Hub in 149th Street and Third Avenue is the fifth busiest commercial area in the entire city of New York. The Third Avenue El is coming down at some point in the not too distant future, there are some major department stores there already, including Alexander's. First store that they opened, and which currently is their largest most successful store is right in this area.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:42.031
Despite all of the supermarkets, et cetera...

John Patterson Jr. 00:23:43.301
Despite all of that right there in the South Bronx with these half million people, there are a number of those kinds of stores. Saks is also there.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:52.560
I think you emphasize the fact that 500,000 population is probably...that would bring you close to maybe the 20th largest city in the country.

John Patterson Jr. 00:24:01.411
That is exact...it's 14th, as a matter of fact. And that's exactly...what some of the benefits are. Well anyway, we have been working with architects and designers and planners, conceptualizing a ten-acre enclosed shopping mall that has now reached the point where we have the drawings and the models. And that shopping center will be one of the most attractive and most functional anywhere on the eastern seaboard. And it will be right there in that area. We determined when we did our studies that 40 percent of the people who live in the South Bronx in fact do not shop in the South Bronx. They will go up to Fordham Road or they'll go over to Jersey or they'll go down to 34th Street...and in some instances they may even go out to Long Island to do this kind of shopping. Whereas if they were to shop in their own area, that would generate more jobs for our people and have more money in circulation. So that's another one of our major projects.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:08.791
How far are you along the way with that project?

John Patterson Jr. 00:25:10.441
Well we're quite a ways along the way. I think we have two basic things to do now. We have to decide on the developer that we're going to co-develop it with and we're talking with several now in that regard. And we have to determine how to obtain the property. We have identified the property, and now the next thing is to determine how to obtain that; whether our cooperation, for example, will purchase it for some nominal sum from the city for the purpose of developing it, and then generating more taxes and paying the city back out of those taxes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:48.140
Because one thing that happens in places like the South Bronx is that as businesses go under, a lot of people don't pay their taxes and the property gets off the tax rolls and the city owns it and the city can't take care of it and it's a cycle that keeps people moving down.

John Patterson Jr. 00:26:00.571
It's a problem that feeds on itself. And one of our one of our key programs is to keep businesses here so that they can continue to pay taxes...and at the same, so that they can continue to employ people. There was an article mentioned the other day where a major company, Cummins Engine--they do all of the major engines for Caterpillar Tractor and Earth hauling equipment and cranes and things--they have their major plant, well the Eastern Seaboard plant is right there in the Bronx. And they were on the verge of moving to a spot in New Jersey if I recall. And in that instance, we were fortunate enough to hear about them and they were fortunate enough to hear about us. And it was just announced in the newspapers the other day that they are now staying in New York. They have acquired the appropriate piece of property. They've waded through all of the red tape of the city bureaucracy and they're going to expand their plant. They're going to take on more employees. Many of those employees will come from our area. And it was because we wanted to keep them here that we did some of the services that we did for them.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:09.782
To come toward the close of the program, could you give your own personal prediction or prognosis for not only the economy of the South Bronx--though that's the main thing you're concerned with--but also the economy in New York City. A lot of people are saying New York City is going to fall: fall of its own inertia, fall of its own weight, and is going to precedes the demise of cities as a major part of our culture. What do you think about that?

John Patterson Jr. 00:27:35.730
Well I think that that that's a very strong possibility that the city of New York can be the front runner in what could be the demise of cities as we've known it over the years. I don't think however that the powers that be and our communities--and I say those those two classes very distinctly: the powers that be, and our so-called ghetto communities. I don't think we're going to let that happen. I see the need, the absolute need, of a partnership between what used to be called the establishment, the haves, and what has always been called the have nots, us, in joining their forces to save the cities. I think that uhm...it's going to require an awful lot of lobbying on the part of us as voters to get the federal government to bring in the kind of resources that can do that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:35.760
In other words, you really do think that we're going to save New York City.

John Patterson Jr. 00:28:38.101
Oh absolutely, absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:38.911
Absolutely. That's a good point on which to end, actually...

John Patterson Jr. 00:28:41.711
It's too valuable piece of property not to save.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:44.091
How about that? Our guest tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been John Patterson Junior, president of the South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation and we've been talking about the work of this exciting organization in saving the South Bronx. Thanks again.

John Patterson Jr. 00:28:57.191
Thank you very much, Roscoe.

