Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.670
The exciting world of Black arts encompasses drama, dance, music, literature, art, film, poetry, and "Black Creation," a magazine of Black artistic criticism, deals with all of these. Here Diane Weathers, co-editor, and Camille Billups, contributor, discuss the annual issue of "Black Creation" on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:45.421
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:11.790
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason," Diane Weathers, who is co-editor of "Black Creation," and Camille Billops, who's a contributor and who's a faculty member at Rutgers University in the Art Department and also at the City University of New York City College. Glad to have you with us tonight, Diane and Camille.

00:01:28.082
Thank you.

Diane Weathers 00:01:28.501
Hi. How are you.

00:01:29.911
All right, we're talking about this exciting world of Black arts, and practically everyone recognizes that Black art is really the catalyst in the artistic field today. And as we've said often, the struggles of Black people in the sense of catalyze the growth of the creative arts. And "Black Creation," which is an annual review of Black arts and letters is coming out with its annual in December. And, Diane, you are the co-editor and Camille one of our contributors. And, Diane, maybe you could tell us just how the magazine has gravitated from a magazine that began at New York University through the Institute of Afro-American Affairs as a student publication and is now read all over the world, started as a quarterly and is now an annual. So maybe you could bring our audience up to date as to how we got to be where we are, where "Black Creation" is today.

Diane Weathers 00:02:22.860
Well, I guess it started out as a...more of a poetry and a literary magazine. It came out annually. It was published by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs and was edited by a guy named Fred Beaufort.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:39.090
He's a very creative person

Diane Weathers 00:02:40.051
Yeah, who did a fantastic job. He took it from, when you look at the first issue that came out in April of 1970, and you look at, you know, how the issues changed, it was a constant evolvement. "Black Creation" is just always developed. He, over the years, he expanded the magazine to include all areas of the arts, rather, you know, rather than just fiction, poetry, and photography. And he included reports from around the country and around the world. He covered all areas: music, art, dance, film, theater. And it was it was just really just a very thorough and a very fantastic publication. About a year ago--well first of all, "Black Creation" was funded through the Institute of Afro-American Affairs, and I guess he really didn't have to concern himself too much with advertising. So over the years, we began to have problems.

Diane Weathers 00:03:50.941
Right. With funds being cut and just couldn't keep going at the same way that we were going; we needed advertising. So, last December, last fall it was, after we had the special issue on music, we decided to stop and devote time to business and taking care of business. And that's either in the form of grants or ads--and or ads--and donations and just getting money to come out. We have not been out since that time, and we've worked hard, and we've got a few ads. We've got some foundation money from the New York State Council on the Arts and the National Endowment for the Arts and Humanities. And we're able now to come out with an issue, and we're calling it an annual because it hasn't been out all year.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:42.122
And it will be an annual.

Diane Weathers 00:04:43.921
And it will be an annual! It will be it will be 100 pages possibly more, and it will be the biggest and the best and the most stellar issue that we've ever put out. We've really gone and we've really got some fantastic people to contribute to the magazine. We've got some fantastic subject areas that we're covering. It will really be a very thorough-- it will be roundup of what's been happening in the past year as well as a look into what's going to happen in the next year.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:21.001
And of course I think that synthesizes very clearly what "Black Creation" is about, and how important it is for there to be a magazine like "Black Creation" because literally there is no all-purpose critical review of Black arts and letters that exists. It's partially reflective of the racism that exists in the society--

Diane Weathers 00:05:40.052
Exactly

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:40.561
--but it's also partially reflective of the fact that the various Black artists haven't really coalesced as they are doing through "Black Creation" in order to interpret, analyze, because criticism of course is the key to the arts. Now Camille, Camille Billops is one of the contributors, and maybe, Camille, you could tell us how you got involved in "Black Creation" and also exactly what your article or your area is about.

Camille Billops 00:06:07.870
Well Diane asked me to to contribute some material, and I told her that I would like to contribute on--contribute material on contemporary Egyptian art since I had spent some time in Egypt between 1962 and 60...Well I was there last year so 72.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:26.740
You've been there very very recently.

Camille Billops 00:06:28.060
Yes yes. And Egypt is very, very, very dear to me in one sense; it's sort of like my bone resting spot. And so I've been involved with Egyptian art, contemporary Egyptian art. So I want to present this material because people didn't know very much about it. We labor under the Pharaonic, and so they think everybody else is sitting over there fanning in the desert. So I wanted to--especially Black people because we use very, very common symbols [hits table for emphasis]. The contemporary Egyptian artist includes the Pharaonic and the ancient symbols in his art, and the black American artist does too. And I think one should see the other one.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:11.321
Now in terms of the relationship of Egyptian art to the overall world, Pan African world of art, how does it fit in? Is it a line that runs all the way through African art? Is it something it's taking off with new dimensions? Is it something that relates very closely to what's happening in the avant garde--I shouldn't use avant garde--but in the contemporary American Black art scene? How does that weave itself in?

Camille Billops 00:07:42.970
You mean the contemporary Egyptian art?

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:44.952
Right, right.

Camille Billops 00:07:45.851
Well, we both came to it in somewhat similar ways of the Egyptian art--a Western form of art came to Egypt, began to spring up in the late 1900s because everything of course was based in the Pahraonic--not the Pharaonic I'm sorry--but the Islamic which was a non-figurative base. In every other kind of a figurative art was either Coptic or foreign. And so the Egyptian artists went to Paris, as Henry Ossawa Tanner went to Paris, you see, and they were possibly there at the same time.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:22.020
Well I don't know, what effect does that have on the art itself?

Camille Billops 00:08:26.260
Well we all learned Western techniques. And so the Egyptian-

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:32.111
When you say "Western technique" that's very interesting because I notice that many of the Black artists are very critical of what they call "Western art." And I've heard several of them as they've been on our program talk about learning Western techniques sometimes they say learning the basics.

Camille Billops 00:08:44.691
Well that's where we got that from.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:45.590
What do you really mean?

Camille Billops 00:08:46.811
Well it's European, you know?

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:49.241
Well how does that differ from let's say the Oriental or even the African?

Camille Billops 00:08:54.490
Well I think it's just a different vehicle of expression; it's a Western technique of expression. The Egyptians fought the--said the same thing. There was an early painter--not painter--sculptor named Mahmoud Mukhtar, and he was concerned about establishing an Oriental or an Asian or an Egyptian ethics to the art [hits table for emphasis] not just doing emulating the expressionist, do you see? And so that's where he in the late--in the early 20s I think established the concept of Pharaonic nationalism, you know, to go back to the ancient not just the emulation of Europe.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:33.370
So actually when you say Western art you really talking about European art.

Camille Billops 00:09:37.511
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:37.514
And you talk about a particular and relatively narrow band of European art. I notice you use the term expressionism.

Camille Billops 00:09:43.120
Yes. Well people went to the salons they went to Paris everyone went. Lois Mailou Jones of course who teaches at Howard went to Paris. Everyone went there. Palmer Hayden went to Paris. It was the thing to do. Now people are going to Africa. I didn't go to the Paris; I went to Egypt. See that was my Paris.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:02.440
Now again, how does Egyptian art that's really in a sense Northern African and Northeastern African art relate to some of the art of let's say South Africa, just to take the other complete extreme?

Camille Billops 00:10:17.320
Well I don't know. The only tie in is how that I'm concerned about is how it relates in a sense to Afro-American art.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:24.011
That's very good.

Camille Billops 00:10:25.691
Because we are, you see, Egypt has always been that wonderful thing in everyone's mind. One, the white rule establishes that as a white kind of thing. It certainly is not; it is an African experience. What we have in common is how we see Ancient Egypt. That's some of it is how we both use ancient Egypt. You go to Afro-American art show, a Black American art show, you see Tutankhamen drawn, Akhenaten, whatever it is, it is in the imagery, the ankhs, all of this Pharaonic kind of thing. You see some of the murals in Harlem, especially there was one up there near Studio Museum. It is Pharaonic. You see, now our relationship to contemporariness now, I think, was this, is within the framework of a third worldness that they are African people. They are not West African people.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:15.402
Not to give a complete preview of the article because it is extremely interesting.

Diane Weathers 00:11:21.701
I just want to say that it will also be illustrated. It will be one of the most visual pieces probably the magazine--that will be illustrated with some of Camille's excellent slides of the pieces themselves that she mentioned.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:35.710
I was going to ask Camille. We talked about her interest in Egyptian art and the piece she's going to contribute. What is your opinion about the role of a magazine like "Black Creation" and development of the arts among Blacks?

Camille Billops 00:11:49.540
Oh I think it's it's very fine. I would hope that we might link up with such organizations like the National Conference of Artists which I'm--we're putting in a little plug for. It is a conference or a body of artists that was founded loosely at Florida A&M, I think 1952, where artists came together, James Porter being one of them and Samella Lewis, and to establish a national Black artists organization. And they've been trying to get somewhat of a magazine or something, but they should link with this.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:23.060
You know speaking of magazines and the arts we tend to say "Black Creation" is a critical review of Black arts and letters. Diane, why is this element of criticism so important? Or is this a high priority item with "Black Creation"-- is "Black Creation" more descriptive, or is it more critical? How would you interpret that?

Diane Weathers 00:12:45.490
I would say it's a combination of both. Because we need both, and we just don't have any kind of vehicles out here at all. So the criticism is very important. The criticism is, especially self-criticism, is tremendously important and it's...it's...it's...it's...it's really important to be able to say--to pull apart and dissect, and you just do. You do a great service to your audience to your readers as well as to the people who are creating. We're also trying in this particular issue to also report. We're having--we have a huge section, we call it "Kaleidoscope," which is going to just give reports on different things just going on all over...all over the...all over the country. We get a tremendous amount of mail and everything from exhibition catalogues to newsletters to just letters from people in prisons from just people at different universities and telling what's going on. So we want to fit this in and say this is what's happening. Yeah.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:01.840
In other words you're allowing the magazine to play two roles. One is a role of analysis and criticism and the other is a role of information.

Diane Weathers 00:14:12.471
Yeah.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:12.881
Of letting people know about what's happening in these various art forms. Now is there an interplay between the two? Is it the role of the magazine to say well look this is going on and we don't really care whether it's good or not good? Or are you saying this is what's going on in here some of the reactions to what's going on?

Diane Weathers 00:14:36.101
There is--I wish I had it with me--but there was a very interesting quote from a little pamphlet that was an advertising pamphlet that was made up for "Black Creation" a few years ago, and I like to--I'm paraphrasing what was said, what was written. It said something that ours is not to really dictate or say that we should be about, say for example nationalism or Pan-Africanism or whatever. And I think--I don't know if I'm answering your question--but I think this is the way we like to be. We like to--we want to be critical, we want to be analytical. We also want to go and delve into some of the things that you might not read about in the general press. And then we want to go out of the mainstream, and we want to go into the past, and we want to look into the future. That kind of thing.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:34.990
In other words you're saying that there is no artistic party line in "Black Creation."

Diane Weathers 00:15:38.682
Right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:40.031
Whatever criticism is done is done in a positive, reflective sense rather than a destructive sense. There's no particular party line in terms of Pan-Africanism or nationalism or politicizing of the activities. On the other hand, it's certainly true that a considerable amount of Black art is political. And you can't really deal with Black art without dealing with some of the political ramifications. Now Camille in your particular area, which is the area of art itself, to what extent are Afro-American artists retreating from or advancing toward the political militants that came to its head in the late 1960s and early 1970s with developments of Black artistic coalitions et cetera-- Some even saying that every theme should be political--to what extent is that still a part of the ferment of Black art today?

Camille Billops 00:16:39.720
I think it's, I think it's still alive, and I think it's alive and well in the communities. I do think that we are not--on one level, we're not so concerned about Black art as Black artists, the activities of Black artists, which is more of a branching out, it's more of concerned with maybe third worldness a little bit, internationalism. It's going into the mainstream. I think the need now to segregate oneself is--no longer functions as it used to. That we have the galleries, we've established all of these things, but we need now to be in the mainstream because economically you don't you don't survive.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:26.790
This is very interesting. Tonight we are talking with Diane Weathers, co-editor of "Black Creation," and Camille Billops, who is a contributor and a faculty member at Rutgers University in the Art Department and at City College and City University of New York. And we're talking about the annual issue of "Black Creations" which will come out this December. It's very interesting, Camille, as you talked about this move into the mainstream, we've had at least two artists recently on our show, one being Linda Bryant who's just opened an art gallery just above Midtown Gallery on 57th Street. We're talking about Black artists getting into the mainstream and particularly in terms of the economics of it. Now this raises that type of cynical question that many of the militants have always raised about Blacks in any area of endeavor, namely that after having used the militants to call attention to the Black concerns, then the next thing the Blacks who are more skilled do is to move out into the mainstream and rip off the economic benefits of this. How do you as a serious artist respond to that criticism?

Camille Billops 00:18:29.730
Well, one, I'm going to be in that gallery.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:32.901
I'm glad to hear that. [Diane and Camille laugh]

Camille Billops 00:18:34.022
Two, I think it's just more difficult than that quote. There's militants and there were militants; there were those who postured [laughs], and there were those who were sincerely concerned about people in the street, street people or ghetto people whatever. And that was very true as there are middle class people. And so, many of those false militants who postured and when the last grant money dried up. They took the dashiki off and moved, you know? A lot of those very same people intimidated people about their Blackness, about the quality of their art, and it was a lot of I think great fascism going on at that time and--

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:17.341
Totalitarianism.

Camille Billops 00:19:18.211
Oh yes. Because artists, you see, Black people all kinds of things, and everybody wanted to force one person as if somehow what you were doing was not valid. And that's--just we cannot survive in ghettos, and you would ask the common person in the ghetto. The first thing they do is move out.

Camille Billops 00:19:33.750
Harlem hasn't been romantic since the time--

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:35.701
That's not necessarily true because there are people who are moving back into the solid Black communities, and I think we're going to talk about that in another

Camille Billops 00:19:43.491
program-- But then that's--

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:45.331
That's what's happening in Bedford-Stuyvesant, for example. But that's insofar as--then we're dealing with class.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:50.101
Yeah. Well that is certainly true. I think your earlier statement about the fact that the panoply of Black arts includes a whole range of Black personalities and Black interpretations of the Black experience, which is one of the things that I think "Black Creation" tries to do. Now, Diane, in terms of support, financial support and other things for "Black Creation" what kind of support are you trying to get beyond the foundation support which you've already obtained? And what can the public do to help? Where can they get the annual? I understand it's going to cost four dollars. How can they get it, et cetera. Maybe that might be interesting for our audience.

Diane Weathers 00:20:29.220
Well we get support wherever we can. I mean we are--we need ads. We want to have ads, and we want to have ads from Black businesses, Black and third world kinds of business--

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:45.570
But you wouldn't turn down an ad from Xerox.

Diane Weathers 00:20:47.130
We wouldn't turn down an ad to anything. No. No ,no. We want ads from everyone but we think it's also--I feel very personally, it's really good to see--like I'm trying to work up something with Linda Bryant now, you know, with her gallery because very important to have that kind of ad to say that, you know, that this person has a gallery, and they can purchase advertising, and whatever. So we're really very much concerned about that. We also are--we think that business is, you know, we've looked to business, and we've gone, and we've met with some people in big business because they're doing a lot. They're supposed to be helping this kind of thing, so we need ads from them. We're still trying to, you know, work at foundations. Ideally, if we could have--I mean a backer, we'd be the, you know, I mean someone who if anyone out there has a lot of money...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:42.180
That's very interesting because there are a number of Blacks who have been reasonably successful, up in the millions of dollars successful, in the arts. Magazines are horrendously bad business propositions, you hear even great magazines like Life magazine going out of business. On the other hand, a magazine that attempts to perform a cultural function and an enlightenment function and a catalytic function can operate on a break-even basis.

Diane Weathers 00:22:11.040
And there are other ones go on for years. You know, some of the oldest, you know, white literary publications, the small magazines go on for, you know, decades.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:21.930
New York University does have a tradition of sponsoring this type of magazine. The TDR-- "Theater and Drama Review"--is published by the School of the Arts just as "Black Creation" is published by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs. We all have the same basic problems. Now if some of the listeners wanted to obtain a copy the magazine how would they go about doing it?

Diane Weathers 00:22:41.810
Well, it will be in New York. It will be available at several major bookstores, definitely at the National African--I've got the name jumbled up--Memorial bookstore at 125th Street, or any major Black bookstore and other major art kinds of bookstores. Or they may call the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at 598-7095. Or they could write or come by and pick a copy up there at 10--it's at 10 Washington Place. They could write; it's "Black Creation" 10 Washington Place New York City 10003, and it's four dollars.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:21.531
I see, and your co-editor, we should mention is Jim Walker, who has been very, very active in the magazine along with Jim Murray, who is not a co-editor this time, but Jim has done some work and is now well-known for his work with "The Amsterdam News."

Diane Weathers 00:23:35.880
And I'd like to mention also some of the other contributors.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:38.202
That's where I was going.

Diane Weathers 00:23:38.671
Yes! Okay, because we have--I mean that's really--well, Vertamae Grosvenor, writer and kind of philosopher, she's doing an interview with Quincy Troupe, poet Quincy Troupe. We have Woody King has done a piece on music of the 50s. Rafiq Ibrahim has done a piece on music of the 50s. David Jackson has done a very good interview with pianist and composer Mary Lou Williams. We have poetry and fiction, poetry from Mervyn Taylor and Quincy Troupe and Jose Angel Figueroa--

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:16.120
[crosstalk]

Diane Weathers 00:24:21.482
All of--a lot of the people who have, you know--Angela Smith, she's also a past contributor, we have some past contributors, we have some new people, and we have some people who've been out there writing for a while.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:32.160
I see, and I understand that you have a critical article on Black films as well.

Diane Weathers 00:24:37.501
Yes we do. We have Angela Smith is doing an overview of what's gone on in the past year in film. I'm trying to think some of the other--Larry Sims of the, she's with the Metropolitan Museum of Art is doing a piece on Black women artists of the 19th century--sociological, you know, what is it like to be Black and female and an artist in the 19th century.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:01.927
And I believe you also have an interview with Alice Childress--

Diane Weathers 00:25:05.521
Alice Childress, oh yes!

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:06.242
And Toni Morrison.

Diane Weathers 00:25:07.230
We have a rap between Alice Childress, playwright Alice Childress, who-- "The Wedding Band" was just recently on TV--and Toni Morrison, who's at Random House, and she's also written. They talk about some of the themes, contemporary themes in Afro-American art. And by the way, Jose Figueroa has also done a very interesting piece on the birth of Puerto Rican poetry in the mainland, which is an interesting kind of thing. Yeah

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:34.790
That's really exciting, and I believe Randy Williams from the American Museum--

Diane Weathers 00:25:37.531
Of the Metropolitan, right, he's doing a critical piece in art. We really have a, we have a really very thorough, we have a--William Moore, who is coming out with a book on the history of Black dance, has done a piece on Black dance from the past to the present. We just have, we have some great things from information from Chicago, from San Francisco, from Detroit. Melba Boyd of Broadside Press has done a piece on Black poets of Detroit, and we just we really we really have some--

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:14.370
Well this sounds like this is about the most fantastic holiday gift that anybody could get among other things. Now as we come to the close of our program, Camille, maybe you might reflect as an artist, someone in this world of Black art, as to how you feel a magazine like "Black Art"--"Black Creation" can help the development of the Black artist. Well I think that the magazine can really act as a mirror for us to see, to monitor the progress. I mean because Black art now is at another stage. It's much more sophisticated now, you know, we're ready we're ready for a magazine like this. It's a fantastic kind of thing. Of course it has two purposes. One is a communications purpose. Yes. And the other is the purpose of criticism without which any art can't grow. As you look to the future, now Diane, this is an annual; it's the 1974 annual. I assume that the plan of the editors is to continue to produce this annual review of "Black Arts and Letters" year by year. Well, the plan of the editors is to try to get money so we can come out quarterly, if not monthly, quarterly. And we hope-- That's the plan [laughs].That is the world of the artists, the contributors, as well as the publishers that this magazine will be a magazine that everyone can look to. I'd like to thank our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason": Diane Weathers, co-editor and Camille Billups, contributor for being our guests and talking about this exciting magazine, "Black Creation." Thank you very much. You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

