Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:00:01.350
Have you ever thought about the number of racial and sex stereotypes in the books that your children read? Racial and sex stereotypes are being attacked by the Council on Interracial Books for Children and the Foundation for Change. Here Bob Moore and Jean Carey Bond of this organization discuss their programs tonight on "The Soul of Reason"

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:43.051
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the black [thought] box" Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:01:09.930
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Bob Moore who is resource coordinator and Jean Carey Bond who is the coordinating editor for The Bulletin published by the Council on Interracial Books for Children and the Foundation for Change. And with that mouthful I'll ask Jean Bond to tell us exactly what the Council on Interracial Books for Children and the Foundation for Change is.

Jean Carey Bond 00:01:32.190
Well the Council on interracial Books for Children was founded in 1965 by a group of writers, editors, illustrators, educators and parents to attempt to promote a literature for children that better reflects the multicultural nature of this society. Mainly we analyze children's materials, trade books, textbooks other educational materials for racist and sexist content.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:02:01.260
Now given the fact that our society in the United States of America is racist and sexist What do you hope to accomplish through your organization?

Jean Carey Bond 00:02:09.419.99999999998545
Well what we hope to do is by publishing our analysis of the subtle sometimes very blatant racist and sexist stereotypes in children's literature we do hope to raise people's awareness about about these things and we hope that writers will increasingly take these concerns into consideration when they produce materials for children. And we hope eventually that stereotypes will be phased out as people have present more authentic representations of minority group peoples in children's literature.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:02:48.180
In other words you will be putting onto these books the goodness and hearts seal of approval to replace the Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval.

Jean Carey Bond 00:02:56.190
Well not exactly. We do try to praise those books that give very authentic and full representations of minority groups in literature and we try to bring to people's attention the offensiveness of certain kinds of content in books in the hope as I said earlier that eventually the books will be written that are free or virtually free of these offensive.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:03:27.330
Now Bob Moore maybe you could tell us something about the way in which the council is supported. Because I imagine an activity like this might have a little difficulty getting some support although it is extremely worthwhile and needed activity.

Bob Moore 00:03:43.190
Well we recently got a Carnegie Foundation grant that has allowed us to set up a racism sexism resource center for educators and in the resource center we're attempting to collect and distribute articles, lesson plans, curricula that will enable teachers and other educators to become more aware of issues of racism and sexism in education and begin to take some positive and constructive kind of activities to begin to change it. One thing I did want to say about the stereotypes that you and Jean were talking about to a great extent some of the new books coming out some of the new trade books and textbooks have a lot more minority people in them. One of the concerns we have is not simply the stereotypes that are shown but how realistically people are portrayed and those are[crosstalk] the most prevalent to ask For the most part they they are trying to deal on an interpersonal level the kinds of problems that come up between a Puerto Rican kid and a white kid or an interpersonal kind of level but very little getting into institutionalized oppression in our society and that's the crux of the issue of racism that we're concerned about and that's what we're trying to move towards for educators and publishers to begin to deal with that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:04:55.530
Of course when you say children's books I imagine you're talking about children from the age of two the age of 21 well of course with the new law through the age of 18 or young people to the age of 18. And this raises a number of interesting questions. For example is it really possible to effectively deal with institutional racism and the political dynamics of racism with young children who are four and five and six and seven years old? It's almost like the teaching of religion. Many religious educators realize that to try to teach the dogma of religion that young really isn't particularly useful because it's done to a [unintelligible]memory to memory level. And it's not internalized at an intellectual level. So how do you approach that? Maybe we might approach Jean by looking at some of the criteria you use in determining whether a book does meet your good heart seal of approval.

Jean Carey Bond 00:05:53.680
Well for one thing we have developed and are still in the process of developing criteria by which we evaluate children's literature. One of the things we're concerned about for example are the illustrations. Are the illustrations stereotypic in their representations of minority group peoples? Are Black women for example always shown as weighing 300 pounds or so with kercheifs on?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:06:19.382
the mammy.

Jean Carey Bond 00:06:20.140
Yeah the mammy syndrome. we're concerned about language whether in fact a minority group characters are assigned a kind of dialect speech that is not that is demeaning of the people who are speaking in this way and which distinguishes them in an equation of superiority inferiority from the other characters in the material.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:06:43.750
That's really tough because if you want to have realistic material in many ethnic communities whether it be Black or Hispanic or Asian there are certain idioms and certain ways of speaking which the people in that community value yes[crosstalk] same time when they get into the larger society.Those idioms that are valued in the ethnic society frequently looked down upon or limit the person's effectiveness. Well like the Black English controversy.

Jean Carey Bond 00:07:17.801
Yes well that and it is a very controversial question we are concerned not necessarily that dialects not be used. In fact we do feel that it is often very essential to the authenticity of the characterization that dialect speech be used. What we are concerned about is whether within the context of the story that speech has the effect of distinguishing these characters in a way that makes them appear to be inferior to characters who speak another way. It's a very delicate thing and some writers are very adept at handling this others perhaps aren't. So that that's the level of our concern about that. We're not saying though that dialect speech or Black English if you will should not be should not be used.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:08:01.540
Do you get into the evaluation of the so-called classics? Let's take the Uncle Remus stories which basically have an African heritage and many of the stories of Joel Chandler Harris wrote about back when all of them came from various African Folktales. They have become a part of the culture of America at least. And many Black youth and Hispanic youth and white youth read these. Do you take any position on these types of materials?

Jean Carey Bond 00:08:30.700
Well yes we do look at the classics thed kinds that you've referred to and other so-called classic works of children's literature. One of our concerns one of our observations here I should say is that we often find that the folktales are are promoted out of proportion perhaps to their relevancy for today's children. That is to say they are promoted over material that deals more realistically with the conditions of today's world.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:09:03.220
In other words it assumes greater importance.

Jean Carey Bond 00:09:05.260
Yes.AndThe sample I've seen some recent ads on Louisa May Alcott "Little Women" which is about as relevant to life in 1975 as it is talking about the Pony Express as a way of delivering mail. Yet to many people and many classically educated people and people who are otherwise interested in understanding what the world is about Will promote this as a good piece of literature. I think it's important. That's much good. It's important that every child read it. Of course over time I guess time diminishes a number of things. And at the time" Little Women" was in vogue as a new book there must have been some other book or some other story that might have been important for everyone to have read. So I imagine this does change over time.

Jean Carey Bond 00:09:52.090
Yes it does and I think increased. Increasingly it's important that children be exposed at an early age to to the kinds of problems that they're going to encounter as adults in this very complex society in this very complex world and we are concerned that that materials come within their purview that are not just nostalgia oriented or hark back to an earlier perhaps simpler time and that they begin to tackle questions and issues that are really very much about life today.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:10:27.880
Now Bob you can maybe tell us a little bit more about how the organization attempts to attack institutional racism which is prevalent throughout every institution media, education, medicine, banking, finance,,business etc.. How is your organization going to approach this attack, approach this particular problem?

Bob Moore 00:10:48.290
Well we're focusing basically if you put aside the textbooks and the kinds of pressures we're trying to organize or put on publishers to begin to make some changes. We're focusing basically on the institution of education and we come from a particular kind of focus on that that is dealing with institutional racism in education in terms of white control of the institution of education throughout the country. And we're trying to in one sense increase the awareness of educators parents students to to to begin to look at education in that way as opposed to a more traditional way of blaming the victim of education begin the traditional way of saying that the children who have get low scores in school or whatever are are at fault for those scores because of their family background, their culture, their race whatever. And we're trying to get people to begin to focus on the institution itself and look at the policies and practices and textbooks and materials that are directly affecting the education of youth. One other aspect..

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:11:51.140
Well how do you do that? Because I mean that's a certainly a laudable purpose but given the pervasiveness of racism and sexism and given the way in which the system operates its own inertia, what specific things do you do to attack this institutional racism?

Speaker 7 00:12:10.610
Well basically as I said earlier we're we're collecting distributing writing materials and publish a cap [unintelligible] that we've sent around about 25,000 copies of to educators to let them know the kinds of materials we have available. And as I was saying those materials hopefully will one help increase awareness of racism. But to give educators and parents and students some specific kinds of activities and specific kinds of action strategies that...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:12:39.731
Could you give an example of a couple of those?

Bob Moore 00:12:42.111
Well we've developed some some lesson plans for instance. A lot of teachers are focusing on the Bicentennial this year and a lot of the material that they're using continues to perpetuate a lot of misinformation, omissions and stereotypes about people of color both at the time of the revolution up till today and so we've put together some lesson plans for teachers who want to do something in the bicentennial that will hopefully help them and students begin to look at the racial and sexual issues that were as real in 1775 as they are today so that students can begin to make some connections to the problems we have today and that existed then the racial divisions in our own country. Do we have just a minute to go back to a point you asked about the effects on children and how children perceive this and how do you get this across. And in one sense it's very easy to show kids more racial images and books. But I think children are very aware of what's going on in their society if they live in Boston and New York or wherever. And what we need to do is help them deal with that reality not try to hide it from them.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:13:48.860
Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" are Bob Moore, who is resource coordinator and Jean Carey Bond who's coordinating editor for The Bulletin of the Council on interracial Books for Children Foundation for Change. Bob as you were saying we have to help our children to deal with reality. Now what is a good curriculum strategy?Can you give an example of an activity that your organization would support with five and six and seven year old children to get them to identify with the reality of institutional racism and sexism?

Bob Moore 00:14:23.390
Well one thing that immediately comes to mind is that children however old they are very aware of things going on in society whether they see the newspapers or whether it's affecting them personally. And I think many educators would agree that the teachers try not to deal with touchy issues at times when children bring them in. And I think one of the just one quick thing that I would suggest teachers do is that when children come in talking about something that's happened to them or talking about something they've seen on TV that teachers try not to avoid that but rather open it up for discussion. It may not fit in with the lesson plan of that day. It may not fit in with the curricula of that week, but I think it's very real to the kids. And kids need an opportunity to discuss that in some kind of directed fashion.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:15:09.510
Now of course the keyword is directed. And I was directing the ad who was direct right and in which direction. [crosstalk]

Bob Moore 00:15:15.691
Right. Well then that gets into the question of where teachers are in terms of either their confidence or ability to begin to deal with that. And and for me that just gets into the need of all educators being concerned with the need in a sense to re-educate ourselves. to begin to get the kind of awareness and information and skills so that we can handle that. And all I can suggest is that if there are teachers listening or parents listening who who want to begin to develop those skills or get information on those skills we we have materials we have listings of other groups around the country that are developing things.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:15:52.411
I'm sure sure that you do. But there is an audience which might be even larger of people who might be willing to discuss them but they want to say well you know why are Black people pushing white people around. And in a guided discussion they could develop a what I would consider to be a negative point of view. Because that's one of the risk of free free speech and in the sense classroom is not a political arena where a person purportedly has the right to propound his or her particular political views.

Bob Moore 00:16:28.130
Well in fact the other hand [crosstalk] is a very political arena here and in fact the views that have been put across in the past have been very much from a white middle class viewpoint both in terms of the textbooks used in terms of the curricula in terms of who most of the teachers are.

Speaker 6 00:16:43.920
And so in fact I think we could say that that education and what goes on in the classroom is very well...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:16:48.600
it is certainly it is at a subliminal or indirect level but in terms of actually saying teachers should discuss controversial issues and provide some direction. You really are putting it in an open arena because all teachers or even most teachers won't necessarily identify with the philosophy that you are proposing. Now one other way of handling it is just let the kids talk about it the students the young people talk about it without any opinion. That has some interesting ramifications. Maybe Jean has some opinions.

Jean Carey Bond 00:17:22.020
Well I just wanted to comment about the question of what a teacher can do in the classroom and in addressing controversial questions. For example if it's Africa some aspect of African history is being discussed or say of say contemporary Africa is being discussed. Certainly I think it would be the responsibility of a teacher to note that there are nations in Africa currently in the process of of change in which people are striving to attain certain rights that they don't now hold. We have the whole movement of people in southern Africa for example to to govern their own countries where they are being you know oppressed and dominated by a minority of of people this kind of thing. I mean I think teachers can raise questions very often about the materials that are being used. They can interject not necessarily opinions but other information that does not immediately come within the purview of children to get the children to think about all of the aspects of other of the situation and not just look at it from one particular point of view.

Bob Moore 00:18:35.040
We've in a sense we've identified the problem. The issue is how to get teachers and educators to begin to deal with it. And let me say two things about that one that we and a number of other people and groups around the country are developing materials to make available for teachers. But in terms of of the the pressures on educators to begin to do this.[unintelligible] Might just mentioned I'm sure many of your listeners have read about this the case in Long Island of a Native American mother who simply took her daughter out of school because of the destructive effects of racism on her daughter in terms of the stereotypes and negative images both in textbooks and in teacher's comments. And I think increasingly educators are going to be forced to deal with this issue it's not going to be a choice thing of will we get these skills will we develop this awareness. But but people are beginning to force the issue and educators when Back students in Boston walk out of a high school because there are no Black administrators are very few Black teachers. They're putting a pressure on educators that are going to force them to deal with this issue.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:19:39.250
They may force them to deal with it in inner cities. But the question that I would raise is to what extent are there pressures from the white population? This basically the source of energy you're talking about are pressures from the Black and Hispanic population. True enough sexism tends to pervade both Blacks and whites and this put somewhat differently. But specifically in terms of interracial activity it's my view or my observation,I should say, that our schools are becoming increasingly segregated and then by and large white parents are not really doing anything in any large numbers to try to deal with this. So why would they put pressure? Why would you expect pressure from that segment of the community?

Jean Carey Bond 00:20:21.140
Well the recent textbook controversy for example in West Virginia was a case in point and you had a very vocal group of people protesting the kinds of perspectives that were expressed and some new multicultural textbooks that were introduced in the just into the school system there. In response however to the to the protests that were large by this group a a an interracial group of people got together to counter this move and a number of white parents spoke out very forthrightly about the concern that they had for their white children that they not be given unrealistic and in accurate pictures of the world and of American society and that these they felt that their white children needed desperately to know about the cultures and folkways and lifestyles of other groups of people with whom they will have to relate when they grow up in the United States. So they are I think more more whites than perhaps perhaps is immediately apparent who are very concerned about these things just as concerned perhaps as as minority group people themselves.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:21:35.060
Now In terms of guidance to our listeners Black and white. Could you name some of the authors who write some of the better interracial children's books and textbooks both Black authors and white authors?

Speaker 8 00:21:49.070
Well there are some authors that I guess we have a particular fondness for at the Council. In the Black category I would say John Steptoe is a very young Black author who has written several children's books, "Uptown Stevie". My special best words those are some of his books. There is Virginia Driving Hawk Snead, who is a Native American, and has written a number of juvenile novels about native Americans and their history. There is Betty Myles who is a white author and has written a book called " The Real Me ", which is a very good book in in that it discusses the question of sexism and it attempts to break down the sort of stereotypical traditional roles in which girls are often cast. Wow. There. Let's see who else.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:22:45.020
[unintelligible] Yeah. No. June Jordan.

00:22:47.211
June Jordan Yes. June Jordan wrote a prize winning juvenile novel called "His Own Where", which is written, by the way, in Black English and is a very effective story. There's Sharon Bell Mathis who has just had a new book published called "The 100 Penny Box" and writes very very lovely books for children.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:23:07.460
Bob what about an area of the history and the culture of our multicultural nature?What are some good books that parents could get for their children and teachers get for their schools dealing with this because the history books are notorious for being racist, sexist and classist? So what do you what do you suggest? Because I know a number of parents want to know about this. They frequently call me or call the University and want to know about what they can get for their children.

Bob Moore 00:23:43.941
Are you talking specifically textbooks history textbooks?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:23:46.821
[crosstalk] [unintelligible] History textbooks or trade books about the history of our country. I know years ago Langston Hughes wrote a book that very popular at that time I think it's called "The Negro in American history". It was written for young people and it took more the great man or the great woman approach which is one of the problems in history we identified around people rather than around epics. Are there any good books that really deal with this in a way that you would feel comfortable with the council would feel comfortable with?

Bob Moore 00:24:17.570
In terms of books that are published by standard publishers of textbooks, my immediate reaction would be no. In terms of the kind of you mentioned Langston Hughes or some of Du Bois' as work or whatever I think to the extent that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr 00:24:30.990
Du Bois ' work wasn't written for children.

Bob Moore 00:24:32.600
Not written for children. But I think some of it is good supplementary material in a classroom and unfortunately at this point I think we're at the level of supplementing the kinds of texts that exist. Even the new texts that are being published have included a lot more about Black people about Native Americans. They still tend to omit a lot about Asian-Americans and Chicanos and Puerto Ricans. But even though they've included more there's still an awful lot that they've left out and not a lot that they've distorted and so I can't offhand name any textbooks that we've seen except for one that was put out by a group of people in Mississippi on Mississippi State history. And that's another controversy that's developed. It's a very good book in many many ways. Unfortunately the committee in Mississippi that decides on which books can be used in the school system hasn't approved it. Instead they've approved the same text that has always been used in the past by a white author and I've read both of those and the latter the the one by the white author just leaves out so much that the other both not only puts in but puts it in a context that's very interesting for all children to begin to see a process of history.One of the things you mentioned the great man or great woman theory. One thing we'd like to see is is books in one sense adding some other great men and women who have been left out in the past but more importantly begin to deal with ordinary people in the movement and and change that ordinary people throughout our history have brought about so that students don't begin to sense that they're incapable of bringing about change. Collective organized change by groups of ordinary working people and other people other what have brought about the change in our society that has brought aboutJohn  O. KIllens who has written mostly books for adults has written a new book about John Henry. [crosstalk] [I think ] which is a very interesting book because the the perspective which he brings to an examination of John Henry's life is one that is very unusual considering the way this character has been treated traditionally. He he points out in the book that John Henry's fight with the steam drill was not just a kind of ego trip of a man trying to prove that he was stronger than a steam drill but had to do with the working conditions under which which he shared with the other workers and that he was attempting to save to protect the jobs of the men in this situation. And so he puts in other words a a puts the whole John Henry episode in a social and political context that I think would raise the awareness of children about the issues that were really at stake there. Well what do you think the future holds? Where where do you think we'll be ten years from now? Do you think we will have broken the backs of some of these stereotypes or not? Well we've noticed some unfortunate changes. Textbook publishers trade book publishers are putting out less books this year dealing with minority people than they have in the past. There are groups around the country that are putting pressure on educators and textbook publishers to retract the kinds of progress they've made, the limited progress they've made and I would simply say that parents educators listening Black white or whatever begin to put counter pressure on educators and publishers to continue and move forward in the positive kind of directions that we need. And that's really the kind of thing that your counsel is doing. Our guest on tonight's " Soul of Reason" reason been Bob Moore who's resource coordinator and Jean Carey Bond who's coordinating editor for The Bulletin of the Council on Interracial Books for Children and the Foundation for Change. And we've been talking about the attack on racial and sex stereotypes in children's and other literature.

