Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:22.540
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:50.170
The world of sports is filled with black stars and black superstars...yet, some negative racial attitudes still remain. Tonight on "Soul of Reason," Alan Baron--editor, publisher of Black Sports Magazine--will be talking with us about the present situation regarding the black athlete. And, Alan, we're really glad to have you with us this evening on "Soul of Reason."

Alan Baron 00:01:10.272
Of course, Roscoe. It's always a pleasure for me to get together with you, and to talk about this subject in particular is something that's near and dear to both of our hearts and souls.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:20.402
One of the things that you and I have talked about, before on the program and also personally, is the fact that despite the large numbers of blacks and professional athletes in particular the racial situation really hasn't changed very much. True: black athletes are making salaries in the six figures and have nice cars, and fast women and... fast cars, I guess. But basically--and that was really a sexist remark...

Alan Baron 00:01:47.500
Yeah it was.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:47.504
Don't know how I was thinking about that. But again, that really has to do with what we're talking about: this is the image that the society has expected black athletes to portray. And as I have said many times, I think it provides a very negative image for black youth growing up. Not that they shouldn't seek to be successful, but the accoutrements of success have been, really, basically negative. What do you see as you travel around the world--literally--in the world of sports, in terms of just the general attitudes toward black athletes? I think they're worse. I don't think they've improved a great deal. What do you think?

Alan Baron 00:02:26.950
Well I think there are really two general attitudes today. One is...the first attitude is: you can't win unless you've got a nigger on your team. And I use that as a term of endearment, not in its negative connotations, but teams that heretofore, owners that heretofore would have nothing to do with black athletes, are now out there trying to get these superstars because they are looking to put together a winning team.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:49.031
Teams like the Boston Red Sox, in baseball.

Alan Baron 00:02:50.101
Absolutely, absolutely...like the New York Yankees here in New York. The classic examples of the bastillion of white athletics have now resorted to the fact that they have got to have blacks to win. That's the first attitude that I see. The second of course is that...I think the perfect example, as was espoused by Billy Melchionni, the general manager of the New York Nets ,who came out and said, point blank the other day, that the reason the Nets are seeking to move to Newark, New Jersey, or over into New Jersey, is because that basketball has gotten so black that the citizens of Nassau just don't want to support it any longer. So while on one hand the blacks are making great strides in the numbers of blacks playing sports,it seems to be a reverse trend in people's general acceptance to having so many blacks be the entertainment medium. So there is that negative factor still exists.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:43.630
Of course, though, we have to put Melchionni's statement in some kind of perspective because there are teams that have practically all black players in towns that aren't particularly black, like San Francisco, that are doing fairly well. So I think that in the case of the New York Nets, there were some things other than just the fact that they had a lot of black ballplayers. If Dr. J [Julius Irving] were still with the New York Nets, the New York Nets would be making money and they would still be in Nassau Coliseum.

Alan Baron 00:04:14.080
I don't want you to even feel that neither you nor I are naive enough to really think that. But even at the height that they had, at the high point of their attendance when Julius was there, they were drawing 9500 people. So I don't think that...I don't think that that's a good community for basketball, first. But I also think that that general feeling--as evidenced by what happened to James Harris, who was the leading passer in the NFC, but still couldn't win any kind of plaudits with the people in Los Angeles, California, and ended up getting traded away as opposed to being the starting quarterback on that franchise out there. I think that there is a lot of strong feelings about having so many blacks in key positions on teams around the country and generally owners and general managers respond to that and say well my...my audience doesn't want to see a black quarterback, so I've got to get rid of this kid and send him someplace else.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:06.043
Of course this reflects the nature of management in sport. Basically management-- both the people on the teams and the people who make the decisions--are white. There are very, very few--I think there are a couple of blacks in front offices in baseball. Atlanta...Hank Aaron and his brother. There's someone in Milwaukee, Wayne Embry, with the Milwaukee Bucks basketball.

Alan Baron 00:05:33.000
Pittsburgh Steelers have a black.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:35.102
But there are very, very few blacks who are involved in front office activity, even when they're coaches and general managers, they really aren't general managers in the typical sense. So this really reflects a general attitude in terms of movement of blacks up the economic ladder into positions of management. But what about other sports? You're talking mainly about football, baseball and basketball...but soccer, for example, is becoming a very popular sport in America. Tennis is a very popular sport and basically we have one black tennis star. Golf is a very popular sport. Hockey is a very popular sport. Those last four sports--or at least three of them including soccer--are pretty much bereft of black input, since they come from sort of an upward socioeconomic mobility situation, it tends to suggest that it could be a long, long time before there are blacks in any large numbers in any of those sports. What do you think about that?

Alan Baron 00:06:40.770
Oh, absolutely. I think that they're going to be devoid of black stars in those particular categories and sports for a long period of time. Even though there are some very fine candidates for stardom in tennis right now...and of course Arthur Ashe, in his usual quiet manner, is fostering this by putting a couple of kids through college who have shown they have the ability. But just...those sports are the kind of things--well, ice hockey, as an example, you got to play hockey from time you're three. I mean there are two: Willie Ory and Alton White are the only two blacks who've ever played any kind of professional hockey at all in the in the world. And both those guys are still playing, but they just don't get any kind of notoriety. But they're from Canada originally, and they played hockey early in their lives. Golf of course I think that Lee Elder has become a very proficient golfer he finished in the top-20 money winners last year, made over a hundred thousand dollars, qualified for the Masters on a legitimate plane this year, and did pretty well. I think that we're beginning to see a lot more golfers, but I think the point that we're making here is in those four sports, there's a heavy concentration of money required for golf and tennis, or time in a unique fashion required, as in the case of ice hockey and soccer. So that soccer is not a big spectator sport in this country yet--I think it will be the largest sport and when it does...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:06.301
You think it'll be the largest?

Alan Baron 00:08:07.320
Oh absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:08.311
Why?

Alan Baron 00:08:08.313
Absolutely. It's the largest sport in the world. I mean when you go to games in Peru and there are a hundred and twenty five thousand people at a soccer match...I mean, it's just going to...soccer is going to take off. You don't need any equipment. Kids in Ireland play with a pig's bladder filled with water and tie it up and they play until it breaks. So you don't need anything to play soccer. You don't need shoes, you don't need shorts, you don't need anything. You just need your foot and something to kick. I think that's going to be the biggest sport in the United States. I also...I endorse it wholeheartedly because the injury levels are much less. I mean it's better than little league football or baseball or basketball. And for poor kids I think it's gonna be a tremendous physical activity for them to keep them just in general shape.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:48.127
Now you say the injury levels are less, I've been watching some soccer on television, and it looks like every other time somebody's down they're groveling in pain and limping, blood trickling down the side of his head because they are really serious when they go up there and they put their heads together to hit a soccer ball. I don't know. I really wonder about that. Well let's talk about your magazine. You are one of the real pioneers in black publishing. You founded a magazine called Black Sports and it has survived very well, and now you're looking to the future for the magazine. So tell us about the magazine, how well you think it's doing, what some of the plans you have for it in the future.

Alan Baron 00:09:30.930
Well I always appreciate the opportunity to talk about black sports, and I thank you for saying we're a pioneer. We...after eight years I think we can safely say that we're a healthy, viable communications company, and we think that we'd like to have our circulation reach somewhere around five hundred and fifty to six hundred thousand copies a month, which would make us reach about 2 million people on an average issue. We get four readers to every copy that we print. But we see the future for us being something a little bit different than just being a magazine company. We're really looking to be a solid communications company. There is a whole area of communications that we as blacks are not yet even involved in, and that's cable television, pay television, which is going to be the future of communications in this country. So we're looking to get involved in that area. We also are emotionally and financially committed to becoming involved in the general health of black America. Our communities are devoid of family and youth oriented health facilities, activity facilities. Our communities have an abundance of bars and discotheques and packaged goods stores. But I mean you just can't find an indoor roller skating rink or health spa, or a sauna or a steam bath. So we're gonna take the company in, I think I'd like to see it as one direction but they're probably two prongs to this direction: that is to develop some facilities in the black communities around this country for youth and family recreation, and to then develop the further aspects of the communication industry for our company.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:15.970
Now of course, that's a big order. It's a very, very tall order particularly when it comes to the fact that many black businesses have great difficulty obtaining funding to do these things. The federal policies on funding of minority businesses haven't helped a great deal. To what extent do you think you will be able to raise the money for these ventures.

Alan Baron 00:11:36.120
Well we are doing...we're doing something right now that I think is extremely interesting, and we are in the throes of merger consideration with another company. And at this time I'm not at liberty to divulge the company, or companies, but we feel we are very excited about merging with a very strong company which will not destroy our autonomy, our visibility or our identity. And it is a black company and we're just excited about that potential. What that does is it gives us a tremendous ability to get additional capital--not only from the banking sources, but equity capital from this new corporation. We also have had a very ironic situation...we're doing our first roller rink in East Orange, New Jersey. And our partner in that venture is none less than Kunta Kinte, or John Amos, who happened to have been raised in that community as was I. And so we are doing this as a pilot program to show people that it can be done, and John, as a well-to-do superstar actor today has enough economic wherewithal to join in this venture with us on a participation basis, and I think it's going to be very successful.And what are you going to call this, the Roots Rink? [Laughs] We just may do that, Roscoe. That's right, man. Okay now in your magazine, which I've read ever since it started, you have a tendency to try to explore the background of black athletes who are not too well known, who've made contributions that people haven't heard about...and also, to try to get underneath of the veneer of the world of sport. Do you think you've been successful in doing this? Is this something you plan to continue to do? Oh yes, I think we've been measurably successful in doing that. We don't want to be the sports section of the daily newspaper. You can find out how many home runs were scored and what the statistics are from anyone. I think what we attempt to do is to be...we utilize sports simply as a thin, entering wedge into the psyche of our reader. We want to be able to grab the reader, but what we want to do once we get him is to twist him and turn him and massage him and show him other things. One of the things that you and I are always concerned with is the lack of positive imagery in the black community. So what we do as a media is to grab you with a Willie Mays story, but don't tell you about his ability to play ball. [We] tell you something else about Willie that you maybe can identify with, see the same kind of problems in your own life, and then see how this individual overcame these problems. The problem that you always have is you tend to to be one sided that way, you sort of look like a profile magazine all the time. But we're developing I think a little more sophistication and journalistic attitude about this, and so that even if we do a team story, you'll see underneath you know all the interconnecting lines of how these teammates get together, how this team is working, what some of the problems are. And I think what you're...what we do for our readers we give him an in-depth look at his hero and we really clear away all the cars and coats and rings and show you that he really is a man underneath and he's got problems and here's how he deals with the problems and here's what he thinks about the American system. We do one other thing I think that I'm terribly proud of, and that is we allow the black athlete for the first time to have a forum, a platform, to say things that the newspapers just don't allow them to say. I mean a superstar can talk about political issues--- Of course that can also be dangerous, because then you can realize just how vapid some superstars are. Well of course you do that, and you'll soon learn to use your pen on those kind of things. Well of course one of the things that I believe is that people have a right to be foolish if they want to be foolish. Absolutely. And I think one of the things that is necessary in terms of setting things in some kind of balance is for people to understand some of the things that motivate black athletes to function as they do. Some of the stories behind things because even though you use a pen maybe to clean up something a little bit, you can still detect when someone is overly materialistic or overly egocentric or always blaming someone else for his or her foibles, or the fact that he didn't make it to the very, very top. I think that is certainly an ideal posture to take in terms of magazine. But what about this whole business of emphasis on education? Too frequently--and I know this from my own research, I think you certainly are aware of this from your travels around the country--black athletes, black youth, who want to be athletes, are just ripped off. Because when they go to school, they're not expected to study, they're not expected to achieve, they're given inadequate schedules, they're given inadequate tutoring, and even though they may make All-American, they still have difficulty writing a literate sentence. I personally think that's a condemnation of the general education system. But I think that those of us who are related to the world of sport have an obligation to try to help these young men and women to avoid those pitfalls. What are you doing in the magazine to help dramatize that particular situation? Well I think...you know that's such a tall order Roscoe. And we are destroyed every day when we find some kid who is preparing to go off to college to be a superstar. I mean he has given no thought whatsoever as to what curriculum he's going to take, or how well he's going to fare in his studies. He's just going to get him a pro contract in four years. What we try to do in the media is to expose--any opportunity we get--to expose the viciousness of the recruiting system, the viciousness of the agents and representation system, because these people are leeches and bloodsuckers...and I'm not saying that these athletes are any less or any more noble characters than anyone else in the system. But as a media, we take a...this is a tremendous sense of responsibility that we have especially as a minority oriented media because so many of our young people are deluded into thinking that superstardom is theirs, it's just out there waiting for you. They fail to realize that the percentages are very slim against them that they're going to even be given the opportunity to play professional sports in this country. So we try to feature, on a consistent basis, articles about both a negative and a positive aspect on this kind of educational crises. We always try to feature, every issue, athletes--high school and college athletes--who are proficient in their athletic abilities but who are doing good schoolwork. And to make a college or high school athlete of the month in our book, you got to be doing well in school and have a good citizenship record. When we do an article about a guy in a feature we call The Man or TCB, we do features about guys who have great ability...I mean you readily recognize them as soon as you read their name or see their face, but you didn't realize this cat is in law school. I mean this guy has been working on his doctorate or this other guy has started his own company. He's got some things going on the side or he has got a whole other side of his life, and that's the saying that we try to convince and to project to our young people: that you can't just be a football player. Because one accident, one injury, one foible, and you are no longer gainfully employed in this society. What about the element of community service? Because I for one am quite critical of black athletes for not really giving service back to their community. There's a lot of lip service paid to this concept and maybe they'll go back and play in an All-Star game on the playground. But I don't consider that service to the community. Well what about that? Is it even reasonable to expect young people who have been exploited--which is what really has happened to them--and then all of a sudden make a hundred and fifty thousand dollars a year to contribute to the community in some way? Maybe it's our fault, maybe we haven't provided enough avenues for them to contribute. But I think if I were to rate black athletes on a continuum of zero to 100 on this, it would be pretty close to ten. I don't think it would be favorable. That doesn't relate to the occasional Willis Reeds and Monroes and Dean Memingers and Willie Laniers and a few other people who've done some things. But by and large, it does seem like a form of conspicuous consumption for the individual coming out of this. Yes I think that I'd have to agree with you: they'd be very low on that kind of a rating scale. But I think that, as you hit on the points, you know, very succinctly: one, there's there's a misconception in the black athletes mind that to contribute back to his roots is a financial contribution solely. I mean he always thinks you're coming at him for bread. You know so he rebuffs and he hides and he sneaks out of town and he doesn't live near you. The second thing that you stated was the fact that there are too few opportunities for him to really come back and to do something. You remember this is a guy...we've already defined him, and we said that he is not well educated that he is... He is apt not to be well educated. He's apt not to be well educated, pardon me. And that he is an exploited kid, he's been exploited all his life and he thinks he's an exception to the rule. So he doesn't really...he doesn't understand that a requirement to go back and to to give, you know, where you came from. So what we've got to do is provide those kind of facilities. Now there...I think of all the athletes and professional athletes in the country today, the professional basketball players are doing more because they set up a facility to do that. They set up a program called YBA: Youth Basketball Association, which is a morals or character education program. And I mean I could tell you some really beautiful, warm stories about Maurice Lucas and Paige and Davis and those guys, those NBA champions, who are right now out in Portland, Oregon, working four days a week free down in the community teaching basketball skills half the day and talking about life the rest of the day. I mean no one--and they're not getting a dime for this. They just feel that they have this obligation. But they do have a program within the NBA that allows them to go out, and last year they gave 300 of these clinics and had 68,000 kids involved in a non-competitive education program that's just taking off like wildfire. So I think that while the black athlete doesn't doesn't do what we would like to see him do, I think what we in the community have got to do is a structured program and say, "Now look man, here's something we'd like to have you do; it doesn't require any bread from you, we need one hour a month, two hours a day, we need your imagery or whatever it is." Even guys who have been branded as bad boys, like Marvin Barnes, went down in the community and did things. He rolled down in his Rolls Royce and got out and stayed down there for two or three days with those kids. But I mean he felt that he had a job to do, that he had a debt to repay or whatever it was. But he did it. I think that what we've got to do is give them more avenues to do that. Yeah and of course one of the ways of giving him more avenues is talking about him. Tonight on "Soul of Reason" we are talking with Alan Baron, who's the editor and publisher of Black Sports magazine. And speaking of black sports and blacks in sports, there's a tremendous number of blacks in the amateur athletic programs of the nation. Particularly we're talking about the Olympic programs. And as you know and I know, this time last year we were talking about what had happened to black, to Americans at the Olympics and how former supremacy and a lot of things has sort of deteriorated somewhat. Quite hoenstly, I'm not so concerned about not winning everything, because I think it has to be spread around the world anyway. But I am concerned about the quality of our participation. And I have a feeling that something needs to be done, particularly for the underprivileged particularly black athlete in amateur sports. I know you must have some ideas on this...what do you think ought to be done? Roscoe, the first thing is that we should spend the whole program just talking about the sickness that is rampant in American sports, organized sports, that has it geared towards upper, mobile-oriented white families. I mean it's just...I mean there's no other way I can say that. The President's Council on Physical Fitness, which is run by the President's Commission on Physical Fitness, is upward middle-class income oriented group of guys who just couldn't care less about what goes on in the inner city. They may care but they don't know how to translate this into action. I'm being generous, I understand that. I love the way you are always generous with things like that. Yeah, they may care, but they really don't put their care into any kind of action. So that the Olympic training programs exempt places like New York City, and I mean there's...there are track clubs in New York City who are running around scrambling for money, black track clubs, just trying to get their kids out to these godforsaken places where national trials are held. I mean how come national trials are not held in New York City? You know, where these these densely populated areas where a lot of these athletes come from. I just.... Interrupt you for just a brief defense of New York City given the economic situation, you really don't have the facilities, unfortunately. I think we should have facilities. Unfortunately, as you well know, we don't have a lot of very good facilities in New York City. But nonetheless that's not an excuse...that's more of an explanation. Well I think that...and let me explain something to you: that the Olympic program has monies to do developmental meets, and they build facilities. They did it in Eugene, Oregon. They put down the best all weather track in the United States in Eugene, Oregon, because they said they wanted our athletes to have some place to come and really do the trials well. So I think that there is...there's plenty of money available in the Olympic programs to do these kinds of things that give New York, or an inner city area, or an urban area, the kind of training facility that's necessary. I think that what has got to happen is concerned people, who can translate concern into activity down at the urban area level, I think that they have got to become involved in America's international and national sports programs. For if they don't, there's nothing positive that's going to happen in terms of getting more minority people involved in our Olympic programs. We always seem to come up and find these, these capable young black athletes at Olympic Games time. I mean, but prior to that, during the three years prior to that final hard push year before the games take place, we we just can't seem to have any developmental meets or any of these programs that are supposedly run for the purpose of developing these young athletes in these areas. Well how specifically would you want to change things? Well I'd like first to see more blacks involved in the President's Council and the President's Commission, since the council operates by the dictates of the commission. There's got to be more blacks involved in that. There are no black doctors, as an example, involved in the national sports clinic and program that's run by the federal government in sports medicine. There are no black doctors in there, and there's some very fine black doctors in the National Medical Association. But one of the problems of course is that all those things are specialized, and in order to get into them you have to have training, you have to have entree. And what you're really saying is that blacks haven't had the entree into this inner circle that runs amateur sports in America. Exactly. It's been an elitist group, and it's a little bit less elitist than you think. It's simply: you have to have a senator or congressman go to the President and say, "I'd like to see Roscoe Brown on this or Alan Baron on this panel." But it hasn't been done for blacks yet. Well maybe some people in the audience might remember those two names. But I think your point is well taken, that basically the black community has not been made aware of the way in which you make an impact on amateur sports in this country, particularly because of the belief that everything comes through money in professional sports. I think you made a very excellent point in terms of the role of the decision makers, the impact of the congresspeople and others on decisions in amateur sport. And this suggests then that there needs to be a broader explanation of this. Are you doing anything about this in your magazine? Well absolutely. You know we are doing an ongoing series right now on the need to restructure amateur sport in this country, and to try to get it to fit into the perspectives and into the dictates that the president has outlined for physical fitness for the entire country. I mean if you just look at our communities, you'll see that there is a need for this, so we're doing an ongoing series. And that's a good example of the way in which black sports has made a contribution to our society. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Alan Baron, who's the editor/publisher of Black Sports magazine. Thanks again for being our guest. Oh, thank you for having me. You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

