Speaker 1: Announcer 00:00:22.370
This is Soul of Reason, a program that will examine the roots of the black lives. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:48.910
The population of the world is approaching 3 billion people, causing population growth to be one of today's major social problems. Family planning thusly, has become an important issue. Tonight, on Soul of Reason, we'll be talking with Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. We're glad to have you with us tonight, Sandy.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:12.341
Thank you, Roscoe. It's a pleasure to be here.

Speaker 2 00:01:15.231
Now let's talk about family planning. You talked about the world's population; we know that the United States's population is what about 230 million people or there abouts. The population of China is somewhere around 800 million people and people are talking about Black people who show about 28 million, if we take the corrected census's figures. A lot of Black people are saying about control of population is genocide of Black people. Well to what extent, just to begin discussion right, is family planning really necessary in the United States?

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:53.140
It's necessary because we want to have families have the opportunity or all people have the opportunity to control their own fertility. And when we talk about numbers of people, we know that there were about 40 million women in the United States who used organized family planning services, about 60 million women in 1975 (the same year as those who use 40 million-- at the same year that 40 million used the organized services) about 60 million women became mothers in 1975. And we also know that from about 1969 to 1976, 4.3 million women obtained legal abortions.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:45.820
You mean to tell me, Sandy, that 60 million new babies were born in 1975? That would make almost one fourth of the population of the country was born. I don't think that's exactly right, maybe it's six?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:02:58.360
Sixty million became mothers.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:01.060
Yeah, that means if they became mothers that means they had babies then. And I-- maybe I haven't interpreted the statistics correctly, but if 280 -- what the population United States is 230 million? And 60 million became one fourth of the country's population being born in a given year, I don't think that's exactly correct. So maybe it's closer to 6 possibly?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:03:27.070
No, no more than that become mothers.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:30.900
OK, well let's talk about this because this does begin to develop the situation in terms of well let's say about how many mothers, you know, who got involved in this, actually went through to the termination of their pregnancy? Maybe that's really what we are talking about?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:03:55.660
Well, 4.3 million women obtained legal abortions between 1969 and 1976. About 1.1 million obtained legal abortions in 1976 and 1 million in 1975, so that we, we can see from the numbers that the need for services is very apparent and that women use those services when they become available. We already know that abortions in this country appear to be the most frequently performed surgical procedure, with tonsillectomy probably being number two (tonsillectomy used to be number one). And with the advent of the pill and the IUD, women have moved from (until recently that is) barrier methods like diaphragms and condoms to more medically prescribed, chemically based methods of birth control in huge numbers.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:04.422
Now, as we said at the top of the show...

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:06:03.720
Well we justify the need for family planning in the United States, on the basis of number one the United States uses most of the world's resources. We use about 37% of the world's resources and have about 5% of the world's population. And with restricting amounts of resources, raw materials, and energy and even water it becomes incumbent upon the nation which is the richest, to begin to do something about its own population which this country has done. This country without a population policy that has been written and defined by the government (as many other nations and underdeveloped countries have) has reduced its population. We are now at a rate of about 1.8 births, so that we are almost, we are almost to zero population growth in this country.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:18.060
When you say you mean 1.8, you mean 1.8 population growth? Is that what you mean? We are almost at zero base of population growth?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:07:25.140
We are almost at the basis of a zero base, yes. We should be at zero based after the turn of the century. When you say you mean 1.8 population growth, you mean we almost had zero base of population growth? are the basis of a zero base after the turn of the century.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:28.920
Matter of fact, I saw some statistics a couple of weeks ago that said that if the present trends continue we will reach, we will go below zero base before the turn of the century, which has added some fuel to the fire of the anti-family planning people who say look we're going too far in a sense you couching the argument by you meant that Planned Parenthood the family planning people are couching the argument in the context of the resources that are available to serve the population.

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:07:59.910
That's one, that's one argument or that's one part of the argument because the fabric is larger than that. We have to also consider that we live in an industrialized nation, where the demands on the individual are such that it is almost impossible number one to support large numbers of children to give to those children economically and emotionally the kinds of support the children would need in order to grow into healthy people.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:31.860
Well, with the welfare system...

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:08:32.169.9999999999418
Well the quality of life argument is part of that.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:38.789.9999999999418
Yeah, well of course some people will say that's really a middle class you know, two children per family argument that basically middle class people don't really want to deal with their children and they want to have a couple and just take care of those, but basically the poor people in this society tend to be the segment of society that has more children would be frozen out.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:02.190
It's really in a sense the genocide argument, that if you have large numbers of poor people, they will demand more for poor people both in terms of welfare services and other types of governmental services. How do you really balance that out? For example as a Black person how do you respond to a Black leader who says that Planned Parenthood or family planning among the Black community really is the basis of genocide really as a basis of decreasing these basic number of Blacks in the communities which enable us to have any political clout. How do you how do you really deal with that issue?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:09:43.860
Well first of all I disagree with it, because I think I personally feel that Black people have this much right to choose how they will handle their reproductive lives as everyone else. And historically we know that this argument always occurs among those groups who feel oppressed in the culture. In the early part of the 20th century, the argument was rampant in this country because there was large migration immigration and white people felt that the immigrants were coming and their numbers were increasing and they got upset about that. The immigrants felt as the birth control movement developed, that they were being asked to reduce their numbers. In the 20s and 30s when Margaret Sanger began the birth control movement in this country, the Eastern Europeans were in the position of saying that that policy was genocide and today of course Blacks and Puerto Ricans say that in this country. I think it's essentially...

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:55.931
Isn't there some truth to that?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:10:57.332
Yes, there are some. I think that that everyone has a right to be suspicious of that argument because the population issue and the birth control issue have been kind of bound together and because the organized family planning has fed into the whole population control issue some of it inadvertently and some of it consciously. Certainly, in the country there is there's been a longstanding feeling that poor people should not have all those children because it becomes a drain on the rich.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:35.591
But you never asked the poor people.

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:11:38.321
No, well nobody ever asks poor people anything.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:40.540
And that's really what the poor people are saying. They are really saying that, look you're telling us how to live our lives. Now it is true that the labor situation and the work situation has changed. Whereas one time we had a labor intensive economy and you needed those children's hands to till the farms and to build the houses and to do whatever else was necessary for survival and even to bring in money by selling newspapers or whatever they did on the street. With the welfare state, which in fact we have to a large degree and the state really guarantees support for children. And there are some allegation that some people (I happen not to believe it myself) but it is an allegation which is extant that some poor people just have children so that they will be able to live a better life because the state will support them. Well that a suspicious argument. How do you really diffuse arguments?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:12:34.720
You know the arguments are presented in an emotional way, based on individual experiences. Often those arguments come from the male sector of society rather than the female and as someone who has worked with many Black women around family problems (including sexual problems and reproductive problems), women have been the ones who have to bear the brunt of childbearing in this country. And women are the ones who have gone to the abortionist traditionally and women are the ones who have tried to provide for unwanted children and who who have had to suffer the most and they are the ones now who managed to get themselves to organized family planning programs in spite of the arguments that are presented by the men in their lives. The men in their lives in the Black community who have cried genocide.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:44.941
What about...

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:13:45.162
In some ways though I don't know whether it's been your experience, but I hear that less and less from the Black community.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:54.101
Well you do hear it somewhat less because of the general lessening of the stridency among the rhetoric of those in the Black community. But you do hear about situations where in some communities where a young child might 13 or 14, might have two or three children and then the courts will order some type of sterilization and there's been a lot of protest on that. I believe the Legal Defense Fund and the NAACP has gone to court in a couple of instances on that. Admittedly that is a sticky problem.

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:14:26.750
Absolutely, for anybody.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:26.753
The young girl who was 14 or 15 and who has because of her sexual promiscuity has several children very young and apparently the pattern is about to continue. How can you approach that from a standpoint of a rational social policy? Because you're saying on one hand, people have a right to control their own bodies, which means they have a right to have children. On the other hand, there are some people who have children at a very young age, who don't really understand the responsibility of it and the state wants to step in and say, "All right we're going to sterilize you. You can't have any more children". But someone else will say that is an imposition on the Black community or on the poor community or on that person. How do you deal ...

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:15:13.961
Well in terms of in terms of social policy, the social policy should be implemented in ways that there are family planning clinics in all communities, that the services are accessible to teenagers, that there is sex education in the schools so that young people know how their bodies operate and how births occur. There should be some attention to family life and the kinds of emotional underpinnings that are part of relationships. And what we see in the country is just the opposite. We see people railing against sex education in the schools. We've Planned Parenthood has just helped to win a court case or a court decision which will allow the sale of contraception--contraceptives over the counter contraceptives condoms and jellies and stuff to teenagers (people under 16) and teenagers still don't have as much access to service as other people.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:28.830
So you think they should?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:16:30.150
Oh of course.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:32.040
In one community, I know of a situation where the young children were able to go and obtain birth control pills without parents' consent and the parents were very very concerned about this and threatened to sue the social agency as a matter of fact I think there was a suit in court now on this particular issue. What is the position of Planned Parenthood on this?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:16:58.500
The position of Planned Parenthood is that every woman, no matter what her age even if she is 10 years old who wants and needs birth control methods, information abortion, whatever has the right to obtain those. And Planned Parenthood has been one organization in the country which serves teenagers without parental consent. It is not against the law to serve teenagers without parental consent. The law is unclear in many places and we have served teenagers without parental consent for years so that we see thousands of teenagers in our clinics all the time. And when you consider that there are 11 million teenagers that we know about who are sexually active in this country and one million of them became pregnant last year. Then you have to appreciate the fact that young people are becoming sexually active more and more. Black youngsters and white youngsters, the incidence of white youngsters becoming sexually active is increasing more than among non-white so that it's a problem that we have to deal with. We have to recognize that that that's occurring and we have to provide them with services because we know that young people who become pregnant have their life choices (if they become pregnant,have children) their life choices are stunted almost instantly.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:50.631
Tonight, on Soul of Reason, we are l be talking with Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America and we are talking about this very significant issue of the role of family planning in the United States in our affluent society. Recently Secretary Joseph Califan, AGW has taken the position that federal money should not be spent for abortions and to advocate birth control. The Supreme Court just recently has rendered a decision which said that the federal government was not responsible for paying for abortions through the Medicare programs. What impact will-- what will be the impact of California's position and of the recent court decision against the use of federal moneys for birth control programs?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:19:56.701
Califano's position is that he, he essentially does not approve of abortion. He does approve of contraception and what we then are our position around that issue is, OK if the government is saying we don't approve of abortion and we want to make it possible so that abortions are not necessary then we want to see more money pumped into contraceptive research and more Title 10 funds for family planning clinics in the in the country. The recent Supreme Court decision and the decision last week in the Senate, which changes the language a little bit and broadens the language somewhat so that Medicaid can be paid by the states for abortions if it is determined that the abortion is medically necessary, that the birth would be a threat to the life of the mother, or a rape or incest has occurred. That language was developed by Senator Brooke and who is one of our heroes this morning. And if that, if that language is maintained it will mean that the doctor can then make the decision around what is medically necessary. And it will mean that many poor people will be able to have their abortions paid by Medicaid. There were about 350,000 Medicaid abortions paid for last year.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:38.730
How many of those would really be medically necessary?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:21:42.392
It would depend on...

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:42.395
Or do you have finished and medically necessary to get into your emotional health as well as a physical health?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:21:48.691
Yes, well that's...

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:49.981
What is the what is the intent of Congress on that?

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:21:51.840
The intent is that it would be including emotional health, in addition to physical health. Hopefully no one will get into what is medically necessary...

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:07.710
You can be sure somebody will...

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:22:09.511
Strict definitions, so that you know, if you have heart disease or your fetus is size eleven you know those things would be medically necessary.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:17.040
Hopefully we won't get into that briefly be realistic about it.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:20.340
With the fight for the right for life groups you can be assured that some test case will be developed where someone was given an abortion through a medical approval because of allegedly emotional reason and it will become a test case.

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:22:36.070
There there'll be a test but there'll be a test case on the other side also which would be that a person was refused an abortion because the doctor didn't feel it was medically necessary.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:48.180
So the test gets back to the Supreme Court is what you say.

Speaker 3: Sandra Grimes, Regional Director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. 00:22:50.610
Yes. We'll get back to the courts and I'm sure that we will be in the forefront of all this. What do you think.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:55.890
I'm going back to where we started when we're talking about the drive for population control in the United States. What do you what do you think the general public stands on this. Do you think that the general public climate is that there should be more attempts to control population which in fact would then tend to influence the decision of the courts in a certain way because many of their decisions are determined by public climate. Or do you think that the public climate is now being influenced by the Right to Life groups which you're saying that in fact this emphasis on birth control and zero population growth is inimical to the rights of the so-called unborn children. How is this going to come down in your opinion.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:49.890
Well I think the right to life groups are a loud and vocal minority.

Speaker 16 00:23:56.070
And I think that in terms well this there has been at least one poll by those NBC polls or CBS and NBC NBC polls that indicate that more and more people in the country approve of abortion and the right of women to have abortions as more and more women have abortions and as more and more abortion facilities are available in the country it will become a moot point because we will have more experience with it and people will be less mystified by that.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:35.670
What happens when we get to less than zero population growth what happens when our population begins to decline. What do you think is going to happen then.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:46.230
I think that we we may have some other priorities at that point. There may be a push to to raise the population to increase it. I mean some people may be very threatened by a decrease in population and that may be another problem that we would have to deal with than some of the Asian nations that have gone through birth control programs that leave India had a very serious crisis in their recent election in terms of the requirement for mandatory sterilizations and vasectomies.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:18.730
But in this country we're talking about a voluntary program we're talking about voluntary sterilization and voluntary abortion voluntary use of contraception which is very different from what happened in India.

Speaker 9 00:25:30.510
Well it is different but then when you go to one of those cases where a teenager is ordered to be sterilized because she has produced three illegitimate children at the age of 14 that's no longer voluntary. Does your organization take any particular position on involuntary sterilizations for we are opposed to involuntary sterilization.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:52.450
In other words your organization does say that the courts or the people who ordered this exceeded their authority.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:59.080
Oh yes of course. Well again when it gets to the black community I've been seeing some polls at the back of me it just sort of split on this particular issue. About half the black community is more or less in favor of family planning and about another half is not in favor of it and then there's a significant group in the middle. What does this mean. What do you how do you think this is really going to influence or affect the black community. Because it is certainly true that some of the programs that affect the black community are based on numbers of people. And if you curtail the relatively high birth rates among some of the low income segments it is going to curtail some of the economic benefits that come from government to the black community. So how do you think the black community is going to come down on this particular issue.

Speaker 2: Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:51.730
I think that the black community is going to come down not as a monolithic black community around this but I think that's going to come down on the basis of individual need. And that when families and women as individuals confront an unwanted pregnancy that the decisions will be made as an individual need on the basis of individual need and we see that more and more blacks have abortions when they are faced with unwanted pregnancies. When you look at where you're going to look at as a political issue then the rhetoric may be very different from the performance and from the matter of individual choice.

Speaker 12 00:27:37.370
Where do you think that more and more black organizations will be seeking to obtain government funds to conduct birth control and family planning programs.

Speaker 17 00:27:45.940
I think that more and more black organizations will rally around the whole issue of discrimination against the poor which the Hyde Amendment language represents so that it means that poor people are denied access to a service that other people who have the money can receive. And I think that black organizations will rally around that issue and feel that all black folks should be able to have access to health care.

Speaker 12 00:28:16.990
You can see that this is a very important social issue tonight on solar the reason we've been talking with Sandra Grimes is regional director of the northeast region of Planned Parenthood Federation of America. And we've been talking about various programs and approaches to family planning and the various controversies that exist in the black in the larger community. Thanks again for being a guest on tonight sole reason Sandra.

Speaker 18 00:28:39.310
You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 19 00:28:53.620
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

