Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:22.610
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:48.681
The theater in New York is energized by so many creative forces. One of the most important of these forces is Ellen Stewart and La MaMa Experimental Theater Club, and we are fortunate to be talking with Ellen on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Ellen Stewart 00:01:03.891
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:04.741
And Ellen we're really glad to have you here because La MaMa is just part of the tradition of New York theater, and what you have done in helping to develop so many creative people in the theater is just outstanding. And I know you have some interesting new projects that you're about to undertake. So could you begin our discussion tonight by telling us about some of those new projects.

Ellen Stewart 00:01:27.620
Well I certainly would like to speak about "Rastafari" ,which is a new play by Edgar White, and it is directed by Basil Wallace, and it is on our stage now all this week with performances through Sunday. Things that are going to start would be, next week, "Vox Humana" -- which is a play that is completely music -- and this is written and directed by Cosmo Savage, and coming up we have "Macbeth" which will be directed by a young director from Russia with Barbara Montgomery playing Lady Macbeth. Tom O'Horgan will be doing "Caligula," and we're going to have casting -- open casting -- for roles in that play. And, at present, we are in the midst of our first International Theater Festival, and on stage is the Schiller Theater from Berlin doing "House [unintelligible] Fatherland." And tonight will open Giancarlo Nanni who will present "Franziska" from the Vatican. And next week, Meme Perlini from Rome will present "Locus Solus."We would like, please, to invite you to come to see these performances. They are in foreign languages, but they are done beautifully, and we would appreciate if you would come.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:02:53.140
Now that is really, really interesting. I am particularly excited by the international flavor which leads me to ask you, the question is, how did you happen to become so interested in international theater, in particular theater in -- as you say -- in foreign language? Is any particular reason for this? Is it that you think that this is what ought to be done? Or, you just feel so much about the theater that you feel that anything that projects what people are feeling should be appreciated by others? How did you happen to become interested in it?

Ellen Stewart 00:03:27.680
Well, it is certainly all of these things, but there's a very basic reason. In 1965, La MaMa first went to Europe simply because we couldn't get critics to come to our performance. We subsequently have toured and have been invited to Europe to play for the past 12 years. At this time, it's a matter of reciprocity, as well, because for all of the persons who are appearing in this festival, we [emphasized], at La MaMa, have appeared in their festivals numerous, numerous times.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:04:02.101
That is interesting. Well, could you give us some background about La MaMa because you've said '65 is a long, long time? And I know La MaMa has been around a lot. Now what, basically, is your philosophy? I guess that's really what I want to ask. What is your philosophy?

Ellen Stewart 00:04:15.341
My love for the human being.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:04:17.630.9999999999709
I know that. That's what I would say [crosstalk] they were known for, and that's what La MaMa is known for. But let's extend that because the theater is really in a sense the conscience of society, as are all the arts, but particularly the theater because it does project real feelings, with real people, in front of an audience. In developing your concept, is your concept to give people a chance -- actors and writers and producers --a chance to do what they want to do, in the way they want to do it? Or is it really to give them a chance to present a message or some feelings?

Ellen Stewart 00:04:56.330
Well, I've never really regarded La MaMa as giving anyone a chance. I think, for me, La MaMa gives me a chance not to be a zero. And everything that has happened has simply given me a chance to participate in the arts. And all the persons that are working is quite the reverse. I'm the one that's had the chance, the opportunity, to share in whatever they're doing.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:21.981
Because most of the great people that I've ever known, in anything, that are contributing to society say that they are just..

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:28.460
I mean that [crosstalk]

00:05:29.000
... That they have the chance, and I know they mean it. I'm not saying that they say it with any vacuousness. I know it's meant, but -- again -- the fact is, that as you live out your life as a creative person, by making it possible for you to interact with all these exciting people, things do happen. There are people who get a chance to develop their talents. There are people who get a chance to be heard, seen, evaluated. And one of the crucial things you said earlier was that in 1965 -- and there may be a reason for that which can we talk about later -- you said the critics weren't coming to La MaMa. So La MaMa had to move out and moving out was to Europe. What was the reason for their not coming? And why did you feel you had to move out particularly to Europe in order to be appreciated?

Ellen Stewart 00:06:20.120
No particular feelings, my dear. It is simply that, in 1965, we were then a coffeehouse theater. We were at 122 2nd Avenue, doing our plays. We would ask the critics to come, and they didn't come to what was considered "coffeehouse theater," and later was called off-off-Broadway. But at the same time, I felt that, at many, I felt [emphasized], that La MaMa had many talented playwrights that should get a critique so they could get published. You see, I would send the text to the publishers, and they would return the text saying they didn't read anything without a critique. So through some circumstances, things that happened, I began to learn that -- perhaps -- if I could get the plays to Europe -- I was told -- Europeans would come to, and give a critique to, any artistic effort. Which indeed is what happened. So, in 1965, on a student ship with 16 people and 22 plays, off we went. We got some critiques. We played both in Paris -- where we were an absolute failure -- and we played in Denmark and Copenhagen where we were very successful. It is from the Danish part, that success, that we got subsequent invitations to come a year later and the next year and the next. However, we made up for the failure in Paris. Since 1970, we have been getting subsidized invitations to play in France, to be in residence, and we have been treated incredibly by the French government. But we started out with the big, big failure and 24 hours to get out of town because I put on Jean-Claude van Itallie's "America Hurrah."

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:18.560
Oh, in other words, it was really a political reason why you did not get a positive response the first time.

Ellen Stewart 00:08:24.292
Not political, my dear. They took a dim view of that play. They did not feel with the things that go on within "America Hurrah." Although, now, this play is considered a classic in all languages, then, the French did not like.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:41.620
I remember that play -- because I think I probably saw some of the first performances -- and I personally identified with it. Maybe it's just my own personal feeling, but I do know that a number of people say, you know, what's this?

Ellen Stewart 00:08:55.010
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:55.550
And ,of course, the world turns slowly, but it turns persistently. And one of the things that you observe -- particularly in the arts -- is the things that might not have been popular at one time all of a sudden become popular. And one thing that does bother me -- particularly as a Black, but also as an American -- is the fact that we have to go to Europe so many times to have our work evaluated, and then after it becomes validated -- as it were -- in Europe, then we can come back here and and be recognized. Is that still something that happens in American theatre?

Ellen Stewart 00:09:34.370
I'm afraid, I would think so. However, not nearly so much. I'm greatly concerned though -- since you've given this little opportunity -- in the fact that we are doing this International Theater Festival, that foreign languages are being spoken, that we do not have too much of an interest in these works. It is very difficult to get an American audience to attend anything [emphasized] that is not English spoken.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:02.360
Now ,is that because of our almost monolingual culture, or is it because we just haven't developed the patience, and the cultural insight, to understand that many things that happen in the theater really transcend the language that's being spoken?

Ellen Stewart 00:10:18.170
Well you've put it beautifully. The last thing that you said is exactly, I think, the case.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:24.350
And, hopefully, by providing - I believe - you were talking you had Italian drama, and you had - I believe - German [crosstalking] drama, and Korean [crosstalking] drama, French [crosstalking] drama. That must be really exciting to work with people in the arts from so many different parts of the world. How are they interacting with the La MaMa company in general?

Ellen Stewart 00:10:45.530
Well, we've had beautiful relationships for all these years. You see all the countries that you've mentioned, and you see it is a very inspiring kind of relationship because with what they are able to contribute from the rich heritage of their cultures, and how one can use and grow from, and at the same time from what we can give. It's a beautiful exchange.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:11:13.730
Is there any feeling, as the audience interacts with these various plays, that not only are they learning something about the culture of these countries, but they're learning something about the socio-political life, the political climate in the countries?

Ellen Stewart 00:11:30.380
Well, I would think, from a political and social standpoint, dependent upon the play, that you would see in the attitude of the director and those presenting, it would be your interpretation of what the plays are about and their intent. I think you will find that, generally, European theater is much more political than American theater, generally.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:12:00.770
There seems to be a tendency to tolerate greater ambiguity and greater challenge of established symbols in European theater. America is beginning to edge up to this, but still what we call "Broadway" tends to determine the prevailing values of most of theater -- which is one of the reasons why you call La MaMa initially" coffeehouse theater," but now it's classified as off-Broadway theater.

Ellen Stewart 00:12:32.190
No, no, dear. No, no, no, dear. La MaMa is off-off-Broadway and it's still "coffeehouse."

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:12:39.170
Now I think that's the tribute, but could you develop or complement, could you develop -- you know -- the difference let's say between off-off-Broadway and off-Broadway?

Ellen Stewart 00:12:50.210
Well, off-off-Broadway is the plays or theaters that certainly first are tribute to Joe Chino -- who is the one who started off-off-Broadway in 1958 -- and who passed away in 1966. Off-off-Broadway were little theaters that, such as we are and were, they would present new works with new persons. This was it. Now there are 175 off-off -Broadway theaters that are doing this kind of work. Off-Broadway is the commercial theater that is primarily concerned with what would be termed a "commercial offering," and has to take all the risks, and so-like, that are entailed in doing a commercial work. It is a smaller house in that it is limited to two hundred and ninety nine seats. When you go to Broadway then you have maybe twelve hundred seats. And again the risks are far greater, and therefore, automatically there is a limit upon what even a courageous producer would like to do because he simply has to be able to sell tickets. Therefore, he has to serve what is considered the American audiences'...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:14:21.741
Mentality.

Ellen Stewart 00:14:22.953
Mentality. I was going to say taste, sir, but mentality. And, I am afraid, in an artistic sense, that has not grown so much. However, it's greatly improved. I have hopes.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:14:36.601
I think, and it is because of groups like La MaMa, that we do have these hopes. Tonight, on "Soul of Reason" we are talking with Ellen Stewart, who is the Artistic Director, and energy source behind the La MaMa Experimental Theater Club as it's called. And as you were saying Ellen, with 175 off-off-Broadway theaters, to me, that's just like having one hundred and seventy five energy cells in the nucleus of an activity. And, really, that's what makes New York New York. It's the kind of thing that what made the Left Bank in Paris the Left Bank. They have enough people, with enough energy, and enough ideas to be able to go out and do what they think and feel. And having said that then all of a sudden as a pragmatic American I say to myself, well, how do we afford this? How how does it, how does this get done?

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:15:31.940
I mean it gets done with people like Ellen Stewart and, oh so many other people that we could name, but how does it get done? For example, how does La MaMa sustain itself as an entity as an artistic functioning entity?

Ellen Stewart 00:15:50.330
Well, we, we get grants from several different foundations, and we get a lots and lots of hard work from very sincere and talented human beings. And we get a lot of interested persons outside of the creative side -- of the creative part of our work. Their energies, these things. The money, which we would never be able to do the kind of theater that we are able to do now, and even with the money that we receive, if we would have to pay -- actually what the persons deserved to be paid for doing the work -- we could not do it.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:16:38.782
Because, in a sense, this is a symbiotic relationship. The society gains from what these creative people develop and project, and the creative people gain from having the opportunity to utilize their skills, and develop their skills, and the like. It's it really is a reciprocal relationship that exists, which then -- to me would suggest -- if we have one hundred and seventy five of these off-off-Broadway theaters that America, as epitomized by the New York theater, is becoming much more attuned to the cultural imperatives -- the fact that we have to invest in our culture in our arts, not necessarily through money, but through our energies and through our attentions.

Ellen Stewart 00:17:27.79.99999999988358
Well, but you must also understand that with a hundred and seventy five theaters, which I believe and know in my heart, are the absolute energy source for what is going on in creativity and theater today, are not generally subsidized. They are not subsidized at all. They are only a few. They are working. They deserve any monetary [unintelligible] recognition [crosstalking], the support, that they would get, but they don't. You see. [coughs] Excuse me. As for audiences, what they might get for their works, it is not at all what it should be. It can only be somewhere, somehow a general re-education or reorientation towards, for the American, to become a public that would subsidize -- in fact -- with heart, and with money, intelligence, it's art. Americans don't do that. So, I'm encouraged a little bit, but for the size of the United States of America we're sorely lacking.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:18:35.420
That is the criticism that has frequently been directed, and that's one reason why the recent resurgence of Black theater -- which people have been identifying with all the way across the culture -- has helped to really revitalize, particularly Broadway theater and just interest in the arts in general, one group which I'm sure you know -- the Black Theater Alliance -- has developed a sort of a communications network so that the various off-off-Broadway companies could assist each other in getting sets, and technicians, and support from grants, and -- as well -- dissemination of information about things that are happening. That is one of the reasons why we're glad to have you talking about La MaMa on "Soul of Reason," because it helps a larger audience to know something about what you're doing and where you are. And speaking of what you're doing, and where you are, could you give our audience your address and your telephone number, so that folks who want to tune in on these exciting plays can do so?

Ellen Stewart 00:19:37.740
Well, we are at 74-a East Fourth Street, that is between Second and Third Avenue, on Fourth Street, and our telephone is 475-7710 and calls can begin at 11:00 in the morning.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:19:56.840
All right. The telephone number again for La MaMa is 475-7710, from 11:00 in the morning. And I think that many in the audience will be wanting to call the La MaMa to find out what's happening, and to be able to tune in on what you're doing. Also, I might ask how do how do young actors playwrights et cetera get involved with La MaMa? Do they just go down to 74-a and knock on the door and say hi, here I am? Or are there workshops? Or how do you, how do actors and directors..? [crosstalking] We have several different scenes [unintelligible], but for our plays, and what we call our guest productions, we have open casting. And our casting notices are always in "Show Business" and "For Backstage." For our resident groups, from time to time, new members are taken in to some groups. And at that time, we have open auditions. When I say resident groups, those are persons who have been in La MaMa for several years, and they have their own troupes, their own work that they are continually doing.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:21:06.962
I noticed when we were talking before the show about one of the actresses whom you mentioned that will be in Macbeth, Barbara Montgomery, with mentioning that she also has worked with the Negro Ensemble Company and some of their productions. And we were sort of having a banter back and forth: she belongs to us, she belongs to them, kind of thing. I imagine you must just have literally hundreds of people in the theater who have had some experience with La MaMa in terms of developing their particular career. To what extent do these artistic people, these playwrights, actors, actresses, et cetera, keep in touch with you over the years?

Ellen Stewart 00:21:53.520
Well, I think that to a great, great extent, all of them. We are very fortunate, in most of the persons, I certainly cannot say all of them, but I certainly would say, since we have been going since 1961, at least 75 percent of all of the persons that have ever been in La MaMa always keep in touch. And that's a lot of people.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:22:20.410
Well, this is, seems as though it might almost be a circle where one helps the other. I've observed as I've been around the various creative arts -- whether it be the visual arts or music or or theater -- that a number of the really, really top people help each other. There's always the sharing of information, the sharing of technique, the evaluation of what's going on, and the sense -- that popular stereotype that people in the creative arts just cut each other up -- I think is, in a sense, a stereotype. Obviously, there are a few well publicized incidents where people do criticize each other publicly. But my evaluation is, I've been around the arts, is that the artist -- particularly in the Black artistic community -- the young artistic community, they tend to support each other a great deal. What is your experience in regard to that?

Ellen Stewart 00:23:16.230
Well, without all the people of La MaMa we wouldn't exist.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:23:20.011
As a matter of fact, La MaMa is living testimony to that particular thing [crosstalking]. Now where do you think theater in America is going? We've gone through a sort of a cycle where a lot of our works have been recreations of older works. We've gone through the cycle where we're beginning to look at some of the classics now. La MaMa's introducing something I find very exciting [coughing], that's introducing international theater into our midst in greater intensity. Where do you think theater is going over the next few years? What, what are some of your feelings about that?

Ellen Stewart 00:24:00.662
Well, going, sir, I don't know. I and I really sincerely believe that theater is growing and that although I am being a little pushy saying, "Please, please American audience," by all means, there is more of an audience for theater certainly than there was five years ago -- and that is for all theater. And so, I am hopeful that in the next five years the same kind of growth percentage will be evident. I think certainly that the Black theater has made a huge contribution towards this growth and, at the same time, one must be aware of the other ethnic cultures, too, and these are beginning to try to -- on a national level -- show what they have in theater. So, with this, combined with what has been done by the Black theater, which will be added to what already exists to theater as we know it, which has been primarily Caucasian certainly, or rather, a Caucasian interest, we are growing. As to what facets or what elements will be present in this growth, of particular ones, I think no more than trying to attain an excellence is what everybody seems to be concerned with now.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:25:38.980
What about the impact of television? I have a feeling that television might be a counterforce that modern theater has to work against.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:25:51.820
In the early days of television, there's some really great television drama around, like [unintelligible]. More recently, as we've dropped into series, and mini series, and the like, we've seen the very talented people spend a lot of energy on some fairly empty material. Do you think that's going to turn around? Do you think that the very strength of what La MaMa and some other theater groups will do will even push television to turn around?

Ellen Stewart 00:26:19.480
Well, one last look, I think it's a positive side of television, or what it means for us. Since so many of our actors, they get work, various means, in television they also get income and that income allows them then to give time to us -- which otherwise they could not afford and we could not afford to give them what they need. So television, by paying the salaries and letting the people do work within television, in effect, in a strange sort of way, give a little bit of a subsidy which we benefit. Because these persons, are certainly La MaMa persons, come back and they work in La MaMa too.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:04.060
I can see that particular line of reasoning, and I sort of go along with it in terms of the acting. On the other hand, in terms of establishing the taste, you talked about the American culture. The more vapid material we have being produced for more millions of people, it seems to me that tends to work counter to the improvement of the general artistic sense of the country.

Ellen Stewart 00:27:25.930
Well, sir, again, I would have to look at the positive side. Because the actor, who has become a familiar face on television, then -- an audience that perhaps would never come to see it -- it would come to see that actor in theater. And, so that's another way that we get the audience.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:42.901
Of course. That really shows that art really is a reciprocal, interactive force.

Ellen Stewart 00:27:47.021
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:47.351
And we need each other [crosstalking]. You need the audience. We need the actors. We need the playwrights. We need the Ellen Stewarts and the La Mamas. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Ellen Stewart, who is Artistic Director of La MaMa Experimental Theater Club. And we've been talking about some of the exciting developments that are occurring at La MaMa, including the International Theater Festival, and -- as well -- their production of Macbeth. La MaMa is located at 74-a East 4th Street in Manhattan and can be reached at 475-7710. And thanks Ellen Stewart for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Ellen Stewart 00:28:25.001
Thank you, Doctor Browne.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:27.460
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

