Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:00:02.100
What does black music say about the roots of black people? What are its themes, its forms, it's meanings? Here's Cecil Taylor, one of today's outstanding black musicians, discuss these topics on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Speaker 00:00:25.410
This is "Soul of Reason." A program that will examine the roots of the black thoughts. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:00:53.130
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is Cecil Taylor who is a musician of considerable renown throughout the world, most recently an award winner of a Guggenheim award in composition. And tonight we're going to be talking about black music--where is it coming from and where is it going? Glad to have you with us tonight, Cecil.

Cecil Taylor 00:01:14.011
It's nice to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:01:15.631
Well let's discuss just what we were saying those roots, those meanings...as you see it, what are the roots of black music and what is it trying to say? And that's a hard thing to say in one sentence or one hour.

Cecil Taylor 00:01:33.660
Well I think first we might decide who the practitioners are, who construct any creation coming from the black heritage. It seems to me that the poet has to first absorb all the events that he can perceive and at the same time be aware of the reactions all the time going on in his being that would be coming from the social impulse of all of the people who inhabit any area that he goes into. Then the next job, is--it seems to me--to attempt to make a metamorphosis of these events into units of construction in the area that you work...not abstractions, but really clarifications of exactly what the point of view is. Now what determines that point of view, because if we're going to eventually get into what is the definition of what I think black music is then we have to, it seems to me, decide that the learning of music becomes a stimulation of the senses to react to particular kinds of musical architectural sounds. Therefore it becomes very important to make dichotomies. You see if one is taught to perceive music by a European teacher, then one has the cultural residue of maybe two or three hundred years of European thinking. And that means for instance a certain way one strikes the piano, or holds a drumstick, uses one's breathing when one sings. I maintain that if one is involved in black music, that there is a completely different organization of musical responses and this means therefore that one has to investigate the culture, which it seems to me that culture is alongside the manner in which the information is disseminated. So what do I mean by that? I mean that once again the learning of music because being the stimulation of the senses, the manner in which it is done also indicates the point of view. And the point of view, black music, would seem to me of course have to be involved in the African heritage as it comes down to us. And of that of course is very difficult because we know that for instance in the early part of the the 18th century people were not allowed to play drums that they made. Actually laws were passed against this and so the manifestation of the black rhythmical genius of course took other forms like the snapping of fingers, the clicking for instance which is a native response to musical impulse in many African societies was also seen in... the snapping of the fingers. Also the way one uses one's body and that can also be seen today in the children in the black community, who of course there is no reason for them to be dancing the way they dance given the cultural disorganization found in black communities. I mean precisely that until I saw for instance the ballet "African" I did not really understand where the beauty of what is loosely termed black social dancing comes from. It has to do, it seems to me, with what is really very deeply a philosophical religious concept which informs the creativity of black people. It has to do with celebration of life, it has to do with joy, it has to do with the attempt to lose one's consciousness to attain a higher order of existence. The word astral... astral - A. S. T. R. A. L. - attempt to levitate to reach the astral coming from the abyss. You see now when I talk about black music, I am talking about music that it is...ordered on a series of rhythmical planes that all the music that I consider valid as black music is... organized on a rhythmical principle. What do I mean by rhythm? Now one of the...points of debate about the value of black music before it was considered black music--and I'm not talking about jazz now because it seems to me that, that has become social obfuscation, a word to keep, separate the different entities kinds of developments of music coming from the black community.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:09:16.580
But wouldn't you consider what other people have called jazz to be part of a broader spectrum of black music?

Cecil Taylor 00:09:25.190
One of the things we have to do now is to create our own language, create and define for ourselves precisely you know what the limits are--what we will include, what we will not include. You see along with those people who are talking about jazz they were usually talking about sociological concepts that essentially militated against the aesthetic clarification of the music. I mean for instance when Benny Goodman hired...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:10:02.561
--Lionel Hampton.

Cecil Taylor 00:10:03.221
Lionel Hampton and Teddy Wilson it was thought that this was a great example. But at the same time people just three weeks ago in the New York Times there is a big discussion... reaction to what Clayton Riley was supposed to have said pertaining to the genius of black music. Black musicians in black music and... some people were upset because they felt that people like Benny Goodman were not receiving their due well of course, it's absurd. It's absurd because...I'm talking about organizational principles, I'm talking about form. The point is that all of the white you know Americans who play this music are playing a form created by black men, and of course Fletcher Henderson the great organizer of black music in the 1920s played piano in Benny Goodman's orchestra at one time along with Count Basie, along with Mary Lou Williams who also created arrangements. I'm talking about the whole way in which the Goodman orchestra was shaped. The way in which people soloed were allowed to speak, was patterned after black men. I mean the idea is, you know right down until today, we have you know such confused people who want to tell us about the murder of Dave Brubeck or you know? And that's quite irrelevant you see because these people merely play in the fashion of, you see...and usually end up by making a great deal more money than the actual creators of the music. It is not only, you dig...it's not only you know the music. It's like the understanding of the religious aspects of it. The philosopher... philosophical aspects therefore you know... also the natural response. If I say that like black music is based on the idea, the philosophical idea of... attempting to rise to heights beyond our consciousness it seems to me that I'm talking about like a natural phenomenon, a natural equaling the way nature responds to forces of creation. Therefore I'm saying that the collision as opposed to friction which leads to the concept of creator being the destroyer, you see, which would be the otherness of your own. I would say that the creation of which leads to the collision in black music is very akin to the collision of two bodies joined in organ...orgasm to give birth to another life.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:13:50.820
But in a sense, doesn't music of every culture, the Japanese music for example, the Hindu music for example, and the European music, doesn't in some way all music attempt to do this maybe in different form?

Cecil Taylor 00:14:09.301
But you see that is not quite you know the issue here. Because what we must define as a group of people are our own specific geniuses. This has never been done with the exception of maybe four or five black writers whose work never gained much wide acceptance.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:14:38.100
You mean their musical works or their literary works?

Cecil Taylor 00:14:39.350
Their literary works. And of course you see when you go to Europe most of the American musicians who receive most of the money there and most of the popularity, most of the advertising space are people like Dave Brubeck and Stan Getz. You see now the... issue is therefore how is it that when we when we listen to a speaker at the Bunraku that the texture of his voice comes much closer to being that of Louis Armstrong than it does to Enzio Pinza? How is it if we listen to a... singer of Hindu music the quality of the voice comes much closer to being that of... an Ashanti than a European folk singer? How is it that in the most recent developments of European contemporary music we have had such pieces as the burning violin or the absolute destruction of pianos with axes. Indeed a few years ago at Lenox one piece was conceived by a man given a commission. The piece was to drop a hundred pianos from airplanes over tangle... on Tanglewood shed. And everyone said very...that was very clever because gee what a sound, huh? So I'm saying it seems to me that... that not all musics are involved with joy. The... and you see how does this manifest itself in black music? It manifests itself because one of the things that Europeans, you see, or the... European adheres to... the... order of music, European music. They are always rather appalled by the kind of energy that went down for instance in Coltrane's orchestra. Although the manner in which Bud Powell or Thelonious Monk struck the piano, it wasn't quite detached enough because also... also synonymous with European culture is the idea of being detached, removed...ah! That leads us to the other thing: which is Europe always makes the distinction between the mind and the emotion, as if the mind were outside the body which houses the emotions. See other cultures may not make those distinctions, you see. So that like we feel for instance that... you can't have a major artist who does not pay as much attention to development of his senses, his feelings, his ability to respond to all of the accidents that he walks through each day as well as... as well as, you dig, the compilation of what those accidents finally mean. It's like saying that a baby cries because he has already perceived the nature of the frequency that his voice makes when they make the sound rather than, because he is hungry which indicates that his... his senses are alive to a particular warmth necessary. So there is always a dichotomy, you see. So that we have the classical pianist what with the back straight...straight, very straight. Is that the natural way, huh? And the hands float, huh, floating up there you know. Indeed it was taken to the point where a few years ago at Central Park one of the contemporary groups performed a piece in which the pianist made music by having his hands float above the keyboard never touching the piano. It's rather absurd. You see, what we're involved with is not unfortunately the democratization of all order because when Avery Fisher gave eight million dollars to Philharmonic Hall, he didn't give it, I don't believe with the idea that Sun Ra will have equal representation or...Ray Barretto's Orchestra will have equal representation. It was for the Philharmonic. And it was for the particular kind of ordering of music that is identified with that. No, you know that's all right, as far as I'm concerned I'm just waiting for some people from the black community to perhaps build their own Philharmonic Hall.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:21:04.702
Of course in the black community there are orchestras which follow what you would describe as a European syndrome...

Cecil Taylor 00:21:15.132
Well to that...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:21:15.602
How... does that square in with us? Now, I've talked with some of those people and they maintain that blacks should be involved in a spectrum of music.

Cecil Taylor 00:21:26.801
I am not particularly interested in that point of view beyond saying this. As Americans, you know I feel that they... we are entitled to do anything we want but it seems to me, however, at this point in time we must be very careful and analyze specifically what it is we do want. You see, because it is rather odd, from my point of view, to think of yourself as being in black culture if essentially you are trained and respond to artistic stimulants the way a European would. It's not wrong. But in terms of the specifics needed to develop the awareness of the black population it seems to me to be a pursuit not perhaps worthy of my admiration. You see because Europe doesn't have any trouble getting adherers to their way of life - their artistic way of life. What we must do in terms of... seeing ourselves we must clarify. Now, let me say this. For instance, the music that I'm referring to, the music that came out of Jelly Roll Morton, Earl Hines, Art Tatum, Bud Powell, Coleman Hawkins, Ben Webster, Charlie Parker, John Coltrane, Albert Iola, the orchestras, you know just from 1920 the Fletcher Henderson, Chick Webb, the great orchestra of John Kirby, the great orchestras of Count Basie, the great orchestras of Jimmy Lunsford, Duke Ellington of course, Dizzy Gillespie, the great contemporary geniuses such as James Lyons, James Marcellus Murray, known as Sonny Murray. This music has never existed before in the history of mankind. Therefore in any other groupings of people it would be openly quite readily perceived as a mark of genius but not for the colored people. There seems to be some kind of block about sitting down and really being happy that you can stomp and swing the way no other people can. So black people who have money send their children to get educated, to universities. What is that? Listen if you really dig on it, if you study ballet with certain people by the time you're 40 you're either arthritic or at best you don't be moving no more, huh. But in other cultures people be dancing until they're 60 and 70. Huh. And they want to tell me about the absolute technique of ballet. Hey. And so we even have the anomaly of having a Harlem dance theater which promulgates the idea of ballet in Harlem where the Savoy Ballroom was, where all those great people did all that tapping and dancing and movement.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:59.810
Of course some people would say because I've talked about this issue very much as you have with some of the exponents of the ballet and of the symphonic form and their position is that through the African roots, through the black roots, these forms are modified and in fact they do begin to take on a, in a sense, a different form. They do not maintain the same basic structured European form that you're referring to.

Cecil Taylor 00:26:27.351
But if they are performed by people who are taught in the European way...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:26:33.681
They maintain they don't teach in the European. I don't know whether that in fact is true...

Cecil Taylor 00:26:36.742
Well who...I mean let us see how they have altered the way you know this...the pitch. You know what...how have they altered...you see it's beautiful. You see because they're trapped. They're trapped in their own learning process. They're trapped to respond a certain way. They think of...their standards for sound production are European, their standards for...harmonic logic are European, their standards for interpreting a phrase. Hey. Huh. When Leontyne Price sings C, huh? And when Louis Armstrong sang C, was there a difference? That's the issue.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:26.960
And of course what you're telling us, as we said in the beginning of the program, we can talk about black music for days and days and years and years. And on our program tonight we've been talking with Cecil Taylor who's been giving us a fantastic insight into the roots and the meaning and the forms of black music and some of the things that black people have to do in the black community to begin to appreciate and understand and extend this fantastic heritage that we have in black music. I'd like to thank our guest, Cecil Taylor, for being with us tonight on "Soul of Reason." Thanks Cecil.

Cecil Taylor 00:28:01.611
Thank you.

Radio Speaker 00:28:02.570
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

