Joan Maynard 00:00:01.280
Few people realize that a free Black community known as Weeksville flourished in Brooklyn's Bedford-Stuyvesant in 1825. Hear Joan Maynard, Executive Director of the Society for the Preservation of Weeksville and Bedford-Stuyvesant History discuss this exciting community on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:39.830
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Joan Maynard 00:01:07.070
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Joan Maynard, who is Executive Director for the Society for the Preservation of Weeksville and Bedford-Stuyvesant History. Glad to have you with us this evening, Joan.

Joan Maynard 00:01:19.070
Oh thank you, Dr. Brown.

Joan Maynard 00:01:20.660
Now let's tell our audience about this exciting community. You know 1825 was only a few years after the founding of the new nation, slavery was still rampant, and yet we have a free Black community in Brooklyn, in an area which is now known as the Bedford-Stuyvesant area, existing and flourishing. Could you tell us about the community? How it got started, and how you and your organization became interested in preserving this exciting community?

Joan Maynard 00:01:48.410
Okay, well the community that was known as Weeksville and, as you said, flourished during the last century came about, I guess, the way many communities grow. There were a few people who came first. Other people came near them and settled so they could have some sort of protection—not only protection, but some sort of social life. But I like to say, even before then that Afro-Americans were really the second settlers in the New York area. They came after the Dutch. They came really before any of the other groups that you think of in the New York City area. There's records of actually Africans who would come as free men who purchased land in the New York area.

Joan Maynard 00:02:33.050
And I think it's important for the audience to recognize that and we're talking about Manhattan or New York or Bedford-Stuyvesant—back in those days it was country.

Joan Maynard 00:02:41.442
Right.

Joan Maynard 00:02:41.445
And Weeksville literally was a town out in the sticks somewhere.

Joan Maynard 00:02:45.530
Exactly.

00:02:46.161
And in Manhattan, Wall Street, which we know is a financial center, was really a street where there was a wall...

Joan Maynard 00:02:53.031
A physical wall.

Joan Maynard 00:02:53.720
... to protect the community from other people—and so happened it was the Native Americans from whom we took it—and from the various animals and the like, so that it really was different. Now these free blacks had settled in this community, Weeksville, and like every community it had certain things. It had schools and churches and so on, and I gather from the reading that I've done on Weeksville is that, through the archeological process of digging and examining ruins and the like, your society has been able to identify a considerable number of the artifacts from those times. And your purpose is to preserve them in some organized way.

Joan Maynard 00:03:35.690
Yes, to preserve them and to have a place—not just to preserve artifacts, per se—but the history of the Afro-American community, particularly in Brooklyn. But of course we just don't stop at Brooklyn because we have ties all throughout the country. Right now, the very purpose that we have come to—and that our society was legally formed for—was to restore three old houses which have been found to be within the boundaries of the old Black community known as Weeksville, and to preserve the houses—not just for the sake of preserving the houses—but to provide such a place where you can store artifacts and history and have people coming to learn in a very informal way, a very pleasant way. And we feel it's important because there is no such institution in Brooklyn which has, you know, hundreds, thousands of people of African descent. And I want to say at this point that this will not only be for people of African descent to get some joy and knowledge, but for people—all the people of New York—to come; that there should be some place that people can come to learn about the Afro-American contribution to New York City.

Joan Maynard 00:04:43.040
Now could you tell the audience exactly where this is physically? We've described it as Bedford-Stuyvesant but possibly you could give us some street parameters.

Joan Maynard 00:04:51.370
Okay, you would I guess consider it the southern part of Bedford-Stuyvesant or the northern part of Crown Heights, according to whose map or whose interpretation you're looking at—that's another whole interesting story. But anyway, I will give you the location of the historic houses. They are on Bergen Street between Buffalo and Rochester Avenue. That would have been on the westerly edge of the old Black community known as Weeksville. And I'd like to say that these houses are also New York City landmarks. They have been landmarks since 1970 and they're also on the National Register of Historic Places in the United States.

Joan Maynard 00:05:30.380
I see now, in terms of blacks in New York City, the original Black community was on the site which we now know as City Hall.

Joan Maynard 00:05:39.451
Yes.

Joan Maynard 00:05:40.651
And then Greenwich Village became another place where blacks were the basic residents for a long period of time, and then all of a sudden, as so frequently happened—and I believe the same thing happened in Weeksville—a white community came in and took over. Could you tell us something about the transition of Weeksville from 1825 to 1875 over to the Weekville of today?

Joan Maynard 00:06:05.520
Yeah, well we give that date starting around 1925 because that's about the date of the old houses that we have identified. However, it seemed as though the institutions in Weeksville became what they were about the time of the civil war for all the reasons that I guess were common throughout the nation. You saw the rise of institutions like churches. It was a branch of the African Civilization Society right after the Civil War. There was something that was the Howard orphanage which grew up. There was an institution for the age, so that you had people caring for the young and for the old. That kind of thing. Now during the latter part of the 19th century, you had waves of immigration from Europe, people who were looking for work, and you also had the streets being laid out in proper city square blocks—rectangular blocks—and you had speculators coming in who were selling houses for people to live it or renting them. So that, essentially, a hilly—physically hilly—little community of small farms and little houses where Black people live became—the streets were actually smoothed over and leveled—and you got a more or less usual city kind of block. And then you've had many, I would say, Italians, Irish moving in. And then, so that the composition changed, that you had a majority of white people and a few Black people who remained. And then after the, I guess you would say, the first world war and all of the things that happened—population shifts, white people becoming more mobile because they had more money—you found that the area became, started to become Black and now is, I guess, almost totally Black again.

Joan Maynard 00:07:51.320
What was the population of Weeksville when it was flourishing as a community, approximately?

Joan Maynard 00:07:55.770
It would be hard to say. Some of the firm figures I've looked at have been the 1850 census figures. I don't believe that everybody was counted, even as today, but it was interesting to see who had land, who was listed as being literate or illiterate, and—here at this point, I would like to say that James Weeks, who Weeksville was named for, was listed in the 1850 census as someone who could neither read nor write. This was a Black man who found his way from Virginia. However, he was sharp enough to get land. And in his immediate community he was well thought of because the place started to become known as Weeksville, even though there was record of earlier people, earlier Black people buying land.

Joan Maynard 00:08:37.350
Well about how many blacks and others does these 1850 census show were on that particular site?

Joan Maynard 00:08:46.050
I would say roughly about two hundred individuals. Now this is a very rough estimation. You get households, we get heads of households, wives, children, sometimes the children were identified as the offspring of the individual. And then you had a lot of households where you had children who could not be identified. In fact we have seen households where it would have appeared that they were white children living with Black families, you know, sort of being cared for. Then we had very interesting combinations.

Joan Maynard 00:09:17.821
Well about how many houses does this represent? 35? 40? 50? 60?

Joan Maynard 00:09:22.230
I would hesitate to give you that figure because I couldn't tell, at least my looking at the census figures. When you say a household I don't know whether a household would consist of actual physical house or whether this would be a subrental in a larger unit. So I would hesitate to say that.

Joan Maynard 00:09:37.020
Could you tell us about some of the organizations that have worked with you in doing some of this research? Because we all know just how difficult it is to go back into history some 100 more odd years ago, and find out what life was like and to find out who lived in various places. It's true the census helps us a little, but there are a lot of other things that you've done. Could you tell us about some of the things you've done, some people you've worked with?

Joan Maynard 00:10:02.311
Yeah I am glad that you said that because, to me—and I think a lot of other people—the Weeksville experience has been just that: meeting so many people, diversified people, who take an interest for whatever reason. During the archeological phase of the work we were involved with people from NYU, Columbia—people who were professional archaeologists and historians who came and just pitched in. These are all volunteers. I would say that the Brooklyn Children's Museum, the Muse, Brooklyn Museum itself, Pratt Institute—we've had an ongoing relationship with them for a number of years. In fact right now, Pratt students are working with us. We're preparing an exhibit to be held at the Metropolitan Museum of Art for the entire month of February 1976. The Long Island Historical Society, James Hurley—who is the Executive Director there—was actually the man who did, who was doing research in Brooklyn neighborhoods some eight years ago and came upon an allusion to Weeksville in an 1870 work, and this is really how the whole ball started to roll.

Joan Maynard 00:11:04.670
Well, in 1975-76 which, in a sense, is the bicentennial year celebrating the 200th anniversary of the nation, a number of communities are looking back at the history. And for Black people it's particularly important that they find places to celebrate which reflect our particular history in New York City. As a sociologist, historian, how would you evaluate the quality of life of Black people in the village of Weeksville in the section of Brooklyn now known as Bedford-Stuyvesant?

Joan Maynard 00:11:41.960
Well I think they had a tremendous sense of self. The fact that, given the economic conditions of the time and the social conditions, they were still able to mount the various institutions that I spoke about. I think in terms of how they thought of themselves, I'll just give an instance of something that happened in 1863, at the time of the draft riots in Manhattan. Many of the people who were living in Manhattan— Black people—were being attacked by poor whites who felt that they had to go and fight in the Civil War for something that wasn't gonna benefit them, so that the nearest people they could identify to attack were Black people. So at that time—and this is documented—many Black families came and actually fled from Manhattan, came to Brooklyn. And there is one very fine document at the Schomburg collection in Manhattan that tells how the people of Weeksville really, on themselves, and said that they would protect some of these people. And, as you said before, this was open farmland. Some of the people had to go into the forest. Who had homes, gave homes. There was no confrontation, because the people of Weeksville said yes, they would do this for their brothers and sisters. They had a sense of community. And to me, when I read that particular piece of information, I mean, I said that these people live together. And I think, what's important is that people today should know that way back then, more than 100 years ago, people were getting themselves together. I think this gives our young people a lot of, a feeling about their own families, what their fathers, their grandmothers went through.

Joan Maynard 00:13:08.990
Now I know that you need money in order to do these things and your society does receive contributions. Could you tell our audience how they might get in touch with you and what type of contributions they could provide?

Joan Maynard 00:13:19.880
I would be delighted. We have a mailing address which is right at the site of the historic houses, which is—and you can write, for the sake of speed "The Weeksville Society, 1698 Bergen Street, Brooklyn, New York, 11213." We would be delighted to send you information as well as any contributions. Can I say anything about what our goal is now?

Joan Maynard 00:13:43.701
Could you give us the telephone number? I think it would be very important.

Joan Maynard 00:13:47.001
Our telephone number is 756-5250 or 5251.

Joan Maynard 00:13:55.250
All right, I'd like to thank you for giving us that information because your project is really an outstanding one. We're talking this evening with Joan Maynard, who's Executive Director of the Society for the Preservation of Weeksville and Bedford-Stuyvesant History. Now Joan, as we were saying, money is the name of the game, particularly when it comes to restoring historical sites. We certainly can see that the people of the community have done a lot. And some of the agencies in society have done a lot. What can the individual citizen do? What kind of money do you need? And how do you expect to get these contributions from individual citizens?

Joan Maynard 00:14:37.081
Yes.

Joan Maynard 00:14:37.085
And I know that's a hard question, but that's really—

Joan Maynard 00:14:39.620
It's the question. Right. Right now, we have started and—since we've been officially able to collect money from the public—we have received contributions ranging from 10 cents up to, I guess the largest single contribution, which was a twenty-five thousand dollar grant, which we received from the New York Community Trust to operate an office, in order to go after the major money, which we have identified to be three hundred thousand dollars, which will cover the restoration of the old landmark houses there in Weeksville, so that they could be prepared to become an Afro-American History Museum. Now, of course, three hundred thousand dollars does not cover the whole ballgame, because after the three hundred thousand dollars, of course you had to think in terms of maintenance so, at the moment, we are planning so that we can build a very strong endowment. Which will cover maintenance, and programming, and exhibits for the future, so that we will have something that can really benefit the community. We are grateful for any contribution from any source. The private sector, the public sector, at the moment right now we are going after a grant under the Community Development Act of 1974. We have been part of hearings which have been held in City Hall and the next hearing will be at the Board of Estimate Hearing on August 14th. This may very well put us a long way towards our goal. Because the houses are on the national register, we are entitled to federal moneys which are funneled through Albany. This means that, if this can happen, we will be a long way toward our goal of the actual restoration. But we will still be working on money for the maintenance of the properties there and—I would say this—that even the established institutions in the city right now are working like crazy and so that we know we have a hard job to do. But we believe in this so very strongly—the importance of it—and we believe that so many of the people, as they learn of it, understand its importance that this will absolutely happen.

Joan Maynard 00:16:43.260
Essentially you're focusing on the preservation of these three buildings and the Weeksville area and those buildings will, in a sense, become a museum...

Joan Maynard 00:16:50.341
Yes.

Joan Maynard 00:16:50.760
...of life in Brooklyn at that time. Now do you plan to do anything, because I noticed that you have the title "Bedford-Stuyvesant history" with the history of blacks in Bedford-Stuyvesant since 1875. Is this going to be part of your project? I know you have enough to do with the Weeksville project but, since you are interested in Bedford-Stuyvesant history, I'm interested—and I'm sure the audience is—as to whether you plan to look at the whole panoply of Black life in Bedford-Stuyvesant.

Joan Maynard 00:17:18.359.9999999998836
Yes. I think the minute that you start with Weeksville, you have to address yourself to that. Not only Bedford-Stuyvesant, but you find yourself having to go out. I'll just say briefly about a family that started out in 1835 in Weeksville and moved to another Bedford-Stuyvesant property—they moved from Herkimer Street over to Decatur Street. And then, as many of the Black families in the area proceeded to do, they then moved out to St. Albans where elderly members of that family lived. And there in their home in St. Albans, we were able to find out some of the best material on Weeksville. So that, of necessity, you move and, in fact, you start to follow the pattern of Black migration over the years. And this, in sometime even in tracing one family, you start to see history. And in fact we have done oral history as part of our work.

Joan Maynard 00:18:08.560
What have you done in the area of oral history?

Joan Maynard 00:18:11.460
Well at one point we had a grant from the New York Foundation and a very fine young woman, Marianne Brown, did an excellent series of interviews. We have had them on tape, and they're transcribed, and I think one of the best things that came out of that was an oral history questionnaire, which we now have volunteers—volunteer oral history people—using.

Joan Maynard 00:18:30.310
One question I'm moved to ask since the period was from 1825 to 1875 and you're doing oral history. Whom were you interviewing?

Joan Maynard 00:18:40.621
Right. We were not getting people that were like, 130 years old. But sometimes relatives of people—people who might have remembered a grandmother, or a mother saying something about Weeksville. We came across several people like that and even the same family I just mentioned, just in their old family records, there was a piece about the Bethel Tabernacle AME church, which has been standing on the same site in Weeksville since 1847. He was a Black church was actually organized in 1818. Bought itself a piece of property in Weeksville in 1847. Right now, on the corner of Schenectady and Dean, you can see the very structure of that church but still on the same site. And we, where did we find this? Not in Weeksville, which is right now, a very depressed—physically—community, I would say, but in a very affluent home of a Black family living out in St. Albans.

Joan Maynard 00:19:35.330
Now what about publicity? One of the things that we are doing for "Soul of Reason" is to give you an opportunity to talk to the community about your project. A number of folks have heard about Weeksville but, given the significance of it, it's my opinion that you haven't gotten quite the coverage that you should have gotten—some of the things being done in national magazines, and on television, etc. to bring this to the fore.

Joan Maynard 00:19:58.110
Yes, I'm very glad you say, said that. We have been on some television programs, but each opportunity for exposure is really great and that's why I'm really delighted to be here. Right now, on the stand, there is the August issue of Essence magazine, which has a very fine article on Weeksville. A lot of the things that maybe you will, as you're hearing my voice, you have a lot of questions. I think a lot of those questions might be answered in that article. And we were delighted to give you any information that you might need. I would, you, before you asked me something about the people who had helped? I would like to say give someone or a group a credit because I think that they were the first step toward the realization of this restoration. We received a grant to do a feasibility study on the historic property from the National Trust for Historic Preservation in Washington D.C. and it's with this document that we've been able to build a proposal and give these kinds of figures and I would like to say that that's a very important thing.

Joan Maynard 00:20:56.170
And specifically I'd like to know how John Maynard got involved.

Joan Maynard 00:20:59.221
Oh...

Joan Maynard 00:20:59.491
I doubt seriously if you grew up in Weeksville.

Joan Maynard 00:21:02.040
No actually, I was born in Brooklyn but...

Joan Maynard 00:21:05.280
Close to the site?

Joan Maynard 00:21:05.642
Well not too far, I was born in sort of Downtown Brooklyn, which was an interesting part in that, that was really the oldest part of the Black community in Brooklyn— downtown, when you see the civil buildings, the governmental buildings. I like to say that downtown Brooklyn was part of the Underground Railroad at one point. But I got interested through a friend of mine, who had taken a course at a special program at Pratt—a course on Brooklyn neighborhoods that James Hurley I was telling you about did. Her name is Delores McCullough, and it was that point people start to identify this place and they started to zero in on finding out stuff about Weeksville. And a little group was sort of meeting casually. And I got invited, and I as I called myself I got "hooked" into this thing. And I am hooked. And I think it's like the best addiction that you can get, because it's been exciting. We have been involved with school children, Boy Scouts, college students, old people—all kinds of people, I guess—all across all economic and racial lines. I think one of the very good things that has come out and continues to come out is the development of this history and its inclusion in curriculum. A school I'd like to mention is public school 243, which we call the Weeksville school with good historical reason. It started out in 1847 known as "Colored School Number 20 Weeksville." Which is another whole thing about whole of education for Black children in the New York City area. And through this whole big metamorphosis it has now become P.S. 243 and up until a year ago it was called the Isaac Newton school, and because of all the interest and the fact that there's a Weeksville resource room in the school, the parents initiated the action and now the school is now officially the Weeksville school. And in terms of the Weeksville resource room, this room is visited by people from all over the country, some as far away as Hawaii have come to see how a project like this—which is historic preservation and archaeology—has been used for curriculum material very successfully I might say.

Joan Maynard 00:23:10.630
Would you tell us about some of the curriculum materials that come out of this? You told us earlier in terms of the social history of the area that blacks did manage to protect other blacks during the time of the draft riots and civil war etc. If I would have asked the question, "What is the most important idea that comes out of the Weeksville project for curriculum for elementary school children?" how would you answer that?

Joan Maynard 00:23:39.870
Well I think it starts, because you can start the history right in their neighborhood, right on their block. To me this has been the important thing of Weeksville, in that, in the teaching of history—any history, of world history—the earlier you can get a child to see that where he fits in, the better you grasp it. And this is not a chore. This is a love. He wants to know more. At the school, kids start out with a map of their block where they live in relationship to the historic houses. They may visit the historic houses and then they physically see..

Joan Maynard 00:24:10.661
By the way, when you say "visit the historic houses," you said they were in very poor condition. Are they in such condition that people can go through them? Do people still live in them? Or what?

Joan Maynard 00:24:19.210
No, no one can go inside. Right now—and I'm glad you said that because I would have left out a very important group of people—right now, if you visit the house or houses at the address that I gave before it on Bergen Street between Buffalo and Rochester, you'll see these three little peaked farmhouses covered over with tin. They have been covered over with tin by the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation. This is the group that is actually holding them in trust for us until we raise this major money so that they can be saved. However, I would give all credit to the restoration corporation because, if they did not step in it when they did, which was in June of 1973, we wouldn't have anything to be working for. So they have put a protective covering on it. They have put a fence around it. The local high school Alexander Hamilton High School has made a wooden sign in the carpentry shop which is erected there: that you can see. I would like to say this: we do do a slide presentation, which gives a lot of information all Weeksville. And if you call us, we can possibly make an arrangement to come to you or you come to us.

Joan Maynard 00:25:21.662
Could you give that number again to the audience?

Joan Maynard 00:25:23.800
The telephone number is 756-5250. And our mailing address is The Weeksville Society, 1698 Bergen Street, Brooklyn, New York 11213.

Joan Maynard 00:25:39.820
All right does the curriculum that you deal with deal in any way with the struggles of blacks—the political struggles—was Weeksville a place where there was political activity? Was it a place where some of the leaders in the community lived? Or was it a place where people lived and raised families and in a sense survived given the hostility of the outside world? What what was it like in that sense?

Joan Maynard 00:26:05.290
I believe that many of the people were certainly involved in a political way. In terms of records, which are in—were in—the Brooklyn Eagle, which was an old Brooklyn newspaper, there's a lot of very fine documentation on what went on in terms of education. The minutes of the Board of Education mentioned many citizens of Weeksville who were very very concerned about the quality of the educational system for Black children. Who was going to teach in the school? And what would be the social benefits for who was going to be teaching in the school in relationship to the children who actually live there? In fact if you read some of those old minutes, 1873 minutes, you would believe you were following some of the arguments which are prevalent today. In terms of—as you're speaking about political action in the curriculum—I think what happens at that age—because right now those are grammar school children—the kids start to get a sense, first of all, that you didn't run to the store and buy stuff. You had to be self-reliant in that you had to provide many of the daily needs for yourself. And I think that's one of the earliest things the little kids find out. Kids have used quilting, in terms of how you grew things, how you cut off pieces of cloth together to make a quilt. And then you found out that this is maybe one of the activities that maybe a great grandmother did. By when the kids go on a tour to look at the houses, they pass by the old church, they start to realize that—it was only when the teacher tells them this—that slavery ended in New York in 1827, and here you find in 1847 people were thinking in terms of what they needed for themselves.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:47.020
I think that's a beautiful way in which to end the program because it does show that what you're doing in Weeksville is, in a sense, a projection of Black culture and Black heritage and, at the same time a projection for the future. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Joan Maynard, Executive Director of the Society for the Preservation of Weeksville and Bedford-Stuyvesant History. Glad to have had you as out guest tonight, Joan.

Joan Maynard 00:28:10.090
I'm very delighted, Dr. Brown.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:12.190
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

