Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:00:02.040
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that tells what's happening in Black America. Each week on NBC leaders and movers in the black community visit Soul of Reason to discuss important issues of concern to black New Yorkers. I'm your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior adjunct professor of education at New York University and president of Bronx Community College of the City University of New York. This evening our guest on Soul of Reason is Professor Nathan Huggins. Professor of History at Columbia University and author of the new book, Black odyssey. Nathan has been with us before and we're glad to have you with us again this evening.

Nathan Huggins 00:00:37.890
Glad to be back Roscoe.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:00:40.141
When you last on Soul of Reason you were talking about your work to get Black Odyssey together and get it published. You call it the Afro-American ordeal in slavery. Firstly could you tell us how the book has been received and then we'll talk something about some of the ideas you presented in the book.

Nathan Huggins 00:01:00.660
Well I've been very gratified, Roscoe. The reception from pre-publication readings by scholars like Herbert Gutman and non-scholars like Maya Angelou and Julian Bond have been extraordinarily gratifying. It's just out, October 31 which is the official publication date. So I haven't received many reviews yet, but every place I've gone- people who've read it have been very very gracious and they like it very much and I'm very pleased about that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:01:33.810
Essentially what were you trying to say? Because this really is sort of a different kind of book. You pick it up you look for your footnotes from a distinguished historian, and so on. And you find that there's some really exciting work and there are some, you know, bibliographical notes and obviously referrals to things in history: names, dates places, and people. But it's like Nathan Huggins thinking about what's happening to black people. Yeah you hit it right on the head, Roscoe. You know. It starts so long ago, you know, as any black person going in America, learning about our history in the American context and being told that we were unfree people in a world that was free. You know I was personally engaged in this study since I can remember, as a child. So what I wanted to do was, to do something that had never been done before, really. Which was to get into the shoes- into the experience of the slave himself. And not only for me to get into that experience but to have my readers... Open the possibility for my readers to do it. Now I felt two things about it. One was that I had to let it all hang out in a way and to be- to allow my own vision to dominate the work. And the other thing is I felt that the kind of scholarly apparatus of footnotes and all the rest of it would stand in the way of the reader getting into what I really wanted to talk about which was what it was like to be a slave and what that experience was about.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:03:08.841
One of the things that I've often thought about historians, is that, in some instances, they give you a lot of documents and a lot of documentation but you don't really get the feeling of what's happening to people. And on the other instance you have people who write about what they think happened or should have happened and establish stereotypes which are very difficult for black people, in particular, to shake. Now how do you walk that very narrow line between being and in fact historically accurate. And yet at the same time putting some blood and guts and feeling into the story of black people in America. New York different may look Haley for example and your work is literally history. Alec's work is what he calls fictional history in that particularly going back into the African past. And even some of the things during the early American slave past he created, in his own mind, what he thought the African and the American slave experience was. Whereas you in your very creative way relate to various topics and even authors but you don't footnote it, so how did you work that? Walk that very narrow line between being interesting and at the same time scholarly correct.

Nathan Huggins 00:04:31.470
Well the first part of it was, of course, to be scholarly and that is that I had to really immerse myself in a whole body of document- documentaries material: letters, diaries, narratives of people, blacks who would ask who had escaped from slavery and so on. As well as a lot of literature having- that has been written about slavery from the beginning until the present. Were the kinds of questions that, of course, were always in my mind. Which had to do partly with the slave and the slave experience to sell but also which is something much you know is very important to me. Is that what it was slavery as an experience meant not only for the people but for the society and for the history which those people are part of. Then of course and not only that kind of immersion in an historical research but also and I went to West Africa spent a considerable amount of time in village life and so on. And of course a lot of that sort of thing can't be documented anywhere you when you're talking about one of the things that you get to ask which is sort of interesting the minute you get into the human experience really into it there isn't any footnote that you can give that you can say well you know this is what a what the Priestess said she was looking for when she was involved in concerning herself with possession and so on.

Speaker 3 00:05:53.360
It was something you have to know and it's something that you have to find a way of communicating.

Speaker 6 00:05:57.180
OK. So that's why history is an imperfect science. That's right. Exactly. It's an imperfect science and that's an art. And one of the things that I do and I think you're you know I appreciate your pointing this out that what I do in this book is I lean on the art side of it. I try to find as as good novelist find ways of getting at the truth through to to a reader to get oneself into it into truth without.

Speaker 3 00:06:30.260
The kind of footnote because a footnote doesn't really tell you anything you said you got it from someplace and and it can be not only dry but it can be also incorrect and an awful lot of scholars of course when they use a footnote they're just simply using a device to keep you from discovering that they don't know what they're talking about or to cover art by their own biases and so on. So what I've done here is I've you know that my biases are there for everybody to see. You start off from the beginning say well here's a man who's passionate about a subject cares about it and feels it it's a personal thing but he knows a great deal about the subject. He knows. I feel I know as much about it as anybody. And it's there and I put it in a way in which the reader is invited into knowing what I know. But at the same time feeling something about what that human experience was.

Speaker 7 00:07:22.130
Well what about things like the slave narratives. They were done by the WPA in the 30s people who were very very old at that time and they recounted their experiences particularly since this is around holiday time. I recall very clearly one of the experiences about Christmas how they were treated at Christmas and it sort of emerged like the master would give them a day off or two days off really and they would have their own little party or or singing and dancing. And he would bring them some things maybe some extra corn or something that would make their life a little bit better and in return thinking that they would do some things for the master.

Speaker 8 00:08:05.330
It sort of was the epitome of that slave master relationship. And in one sense as I read those narratives I got two feelings one this the extreme brutality and dehumanization of the system and the other was a kind of feudal society where the slaves and the Masters really were dramas in the same play. Yeah well you know Roscoe the problem is what is one do with a source here with these people who are 60 70 80 90 years old and in the 1930s which is also interesting looking back at a period when they were children but when they were slaves and talking about what that system was now not only is it that they're old. And the question of their memory which is probably their memories very good.

Speaker 9 00:08:57.750
It is the major theme maybe the moment the mind the tales.

Speaker 6 00:09:01.340
Yeah and they can have it as a matter of I've done an awful lot of detail who their master was where they were what who their family was who their mother was father and son. There are this has been checked out and all these narratives are very good on that. But one of the things you have to bear in mind and when reading that is here are people who have gone through hell. Since emancipation.

Speaker 7 00:09:20.990
Most of those people have become you know if slavery was bad the period following emancipation for many of them was it was worse because whatever dependencies that they might not have protection they might have had we go in the clan and all those folks got loose in the south in the late 19th century and 1880 when the black codes were created and the lynching was just rampant. Probably that was really the worst physical time for blacks in America.

Speaker 9 00:09:47.420
HALL Yeah. And one historian Robert Logan calls it the nadir which indeed is I was there I was going to use her. It's a it's a terrible. It was a terrible time.

Speaker 6 00:09:56.510
So here are people who've lived through that and at the time they're being questioned in the depths of the Depression Bush was again another experience that was really horrendous for Blighty. And you know the question of where the next meal is coming from is just that is the real question then so when you read these narratives with that in mind and you suddenly discovered these people are saying oh you know when I was a child and a slave it was you know one of the things was so wonderful we always eight you know when you take that into account the the the experience that they're talking through and about that to some extent the whole experience of slavery has a different kind of color. Now the other thing about it is that you know one of the things you look at these narratives you see one sort of master slave relationships which are not sometimes not all that brutal. Sometimes you find brutality ugly the meanest kind of stories that you can ever imagine. But you know one can be stopped there but if you go beyond that kind of surface thing you also discover some other things. There are all kinds of testimony to their own sense of family testimony to their sense of affection to one another testimony about their own sense of character how they behaved in situations which were which were very trying. And so that what I'm saying is that the narrative with all its problems and it has problems reveals something about the people themselves and the experience itself that is extraordinarily rich and important. But one has to get beneath the surface of it. And and the kind of factual thing that has been said to really get into the character and the to to get some sense of the fabric of life or the texture of life itself.

Speaker 7 00:11:47.390
I think we've seen an evolution in the role of the black historian going back to Carter Woodson where in fact we put some names and dates and some great people and great events together carrying through the well-known book from slavery to freedom. John Hope Franklin where he began to do some political analysis and then up to some of the more contemporary books like Roll Jordan roll by Eugene Genovese he and Herbert Gutman black family in slavery and freedom and now Black Odyssey thing looking at the slave experience and the. Reconstruction Experience from an analytical point of view as well as from a descriptive point of view. And then the biggest blockbuster of them all. Alex Haley's Roots which adds a real human dimension to this experience that everyone black and white can identify with. And one of the question when I asked you as a historian is how have you found reactions to your work and your ideas being accepted now that more people are aware of roots do they know it existed or they saw it or they read it. Has that really improved the way in which people respond to your analysis. Or has it made it more difficult because sometimes a little knowledge is a dangerous thing.

Speaker 6 00:13:07.640
Well it's made it more difficult in a way I think because roots as you know oftentimes when talking about media people when you're talking about how people are responding historians for the most part don't make any confusion they say his roots is is you know they they don't see it as a history. And so they they don't identify the two books at all. But whenever I you know I've been on television and radio a great deal recently and almost every time you go on you'll have somebody in some way saying well really what's the difference between this book and wrote you know media people have a tendency to say well once you've done a black thing you've done it for as long as you have back and once you have slavery and you have struggle and oppression that's all you write about that's all you need to write about for this season and next season maybe there'll be another one. And but you know it's easy enough to deal with as a matter of fact because you know the books are really quite different. And I'm not interested at all in genealogy personally I you know I would like to know in curious ways something about my family in slavery. I really am not that frankly I don't know about you Roscoe but I really I'm not concerned that much as to whether my family was connected with the Evos or the Mandingo or whatnot.

Speaker 10 00:14:23.670
I know that from Africa I know and I appreciate that African background but it doesn't really matter that I make that linkage. What I am concerned with more and what I and what I think the impact of my book I hope the impact of my book is it is it asks for a re-evaluation of American history. And that I think you know this. You mentioned that there has been a survey of a change in the way historians have been dealing with Afro-American experience and I think that's very right. At one point it was essential that a black historian or person writing about the black experience had to say that there were important people there was a resistance so you had to to emphasize that there was Harriet Tubman and Nat Turner and these heroes. And she rose as Maya Angelou would say these people who were really resisting the system. It was important to say because nobody knew it. No one would believe it. It was important to bang it across as much as one possibly could. And unfortunately though in doing that one adopted the scheme that racist historians had passed on to us. That is to say that slaves were content with their lot. And what we say now they weren't content with a lot. Look at Nat Turner. So we're involved in that argument which is insane to begin with it's a ridiculous argument to begin with. But what has happened recently more since the 70s with blazing games the slave community and coming down through Genovese these roll Jordan Roll and government the black family and the families in America. Is a focus on the black experience itself not to say what you know what is the slave what was the slave. And so that one gets into that and the experience in trying to understand what that was the mindset the religion the all the rest of it. Rather than looking at it in terms of these old fashioned rather racist terms. Now one of the things that I do and I think and I think no one has done is to raise a question and I answer it for myself for my own satisfaction that when you have seen a society in which has relied upon unfree labor or on a slave system is it possible any long to talk longer to talk about it as a free society. And that's not just a rhetorical question. I mean it's not just something that I want to as a debating point. But if you begin to discover that there were not just absolute categories of slavery and freedom that there were blacks who are not free. But who are who were not slaves but who were also not free in the sense that they had political freedom and whites themselves who made themselves want to be opposed to slavery were not free in the sense that they had free speech or they had the ability to to attack the system in any kind of legal way within within the American political system. One of the things that one begins to discover is that you are not dealing with a history of a free people at all but you're dealing with the history of tyranny and the tyrannized persons are black. It's true. And whether white people perceive themselves as tyrants or not as to some extent irrelevant. But what I'm suggesting is that what we have to do is really talk about the whole nature of American history in a different light when one really gets into what the that Afro Americans experience was. And in many ways continues to be I don't I don't see the reason we are talking with Professor Nathan Huggins of Columbia University and we're talking about his new book Black odyssey.

Speaker 7 00:17:59.860
And as he was saying. Nathan you really are throwing down the gauntlet to American history for example your epilogue of your book you call thick temperate tyrannies which means tyranny remains as it always did. And particularly after 200 years of the so-called Republic. The bicentennial and all the hoopla who in flags and so on and the recent elements of Watergate and the way in which our society has not responded to the jobless mess and society and so on and the hopes that people had in the Carter administration which thus far haven't been fulfilled. No it's almost business as usual. One question that I would ask you is as a historian one of your roles is to analyze and determine the military in which the society grows but also hopefully you will be able to get some cues as to not only why things happen but maybe what can or should be done to change the way in which things exist on the basis of your analysis and your thought and your clear explication of the fact that America really did not function as a free society and it did really had two levels of people three levels of people. How do you think that the events of the past 25 years the brown desegregation case the Civil Rights Act of 64 the Voting Rights Act of 65. The Great Society. How did the reaction to the assassination of King how do you think these events are shaping or have shaped the American thought process the American scheme. Well these events are challenges the exception to the assassination of King the events such as the Brown decision and the development towards affirmative action and that sort of thing are challenges to a traditional.

Speaker 6 00:20:16.540
Condition in America which is to say a condition of racial privilege. On the assumption.

Speaker 10 00:20:22.450
That there is a privileged race in America the founding father white Founding Fathers a Euro American founding fathers saw themselves in the revolution as attacking and doing away with the assumption of the divine right of kings. But what they substituted was a divine right of race white man. Yeah. And it was not. I'm not not saying that frivolously I think that you know there was an assumption all the way along that there were that there was a right. There was a divine right of white people to rule and I have privilege.

Speaker 13 00:20:54.010
That's probably best articulated in some of Jefferson's writing. Well yes. Where even though Jefferson had black children and his mistresses were was black and he acknowledged the fact that they had certain skills and it finally came down to believing that black people were equal he just couldn't deal with that. He probably was best shown in his reaction to Ben Benjamin Banneker in his letter to Banneker in which he praised Banneker for his work and said He's a credit to his race and all that business. And then later on he wrote to someone said I'm not exactly sure Banneker really did this because he's not a black man could have done this.

Speaker 14 00:21:30.470
You know this this this idea of privilege of race was deeply embedded has been deeply embedded in American thought and American culture so much so that people who come here are came after the revolution who have come in the 19th and 20th century from Europe come with the assumption. Indeed perhaps not. Articulated but the assumption that they're that they are privileged people.

Speaker 12 00:21:54.520
These are the black people are nonwhites but is that not you attribute it to America but is it not a western phenomenon Europe European phenomenon as well.

Speaker 14 00:22:06.760
Yeah except the probably the difference of course is that when you're dealing with say France or Italy or Germany or England they're on the people you're dealing to some extent with a homogenous society which has a presumption of privilege because they. That's their home. Whereas in America you have a different kind of presumption that anybody who comes is ultimately going to be an equal person. But where where you got immigrants from southern Europe Eastern Europe Northern Europe would come into America they come maybe not thinking it as they get on the boat or even as they get off the boat. But at some point and very early in that experience they begin to see that they as an oppressed people themselves oftentimes have a people beneath them and that they have a presumption of privilege in the society.

Speaker 13 00:22:58.720
But of course even there at least in my view they seem to be a pecking order among European Oh yes the darker you were the lower the scale and that had to do with the closer to the southern part of Europe you were the more you had to hustle particularly in terms of way in which Italians and Greek Americans have been treated and the more you get to the northern part of Europe Scandinavia better you might have better your life. And I think there's one guy in the Hitler who tried to impress that on the white world as well as on black work right. But you know one thing that happened in America is and continues to happen is that when it comes to a crunch however political or economic crunch and one of the problems that we've had with coalition politics is that when it really comes to a crunch all of these people who are non black are white peoples European people.

Speaker 6 00:23:52.540
Feel themselves as a phalanx archaic consider themselves as white as opposed to.

Speaker 7 00:23:57.380
You see that in a blue collar type responses to integration moves in places like Chicago where mainly the people who are leading the battle against black people are people who are blue collar and many of them just one generation arrived in contrast with blacks who've been here five and six generations now now now that you know the thing is that they're doing this at great cost to themselves their own interest of course.

Speaker 10 00:24:21.190
But the problem here and you know this is a reason why I put this question and answer in terms of this issue of privilege is it privilege is very very difficult to give up and just as it was it was hard for the monarchy to give up the Divine Right of Kings it's very very difficult for white people to give up the idea that the assumption of privilege. Now you can have you know all of these events that we've talked about of the Brown decision coming down to affirmative action and we see it even more sharply in affirmative action here. You have white men who are the most privileged of the privileged you would say well I have. They presume a right to jobs. First Choice jobs. And even though they may say well there was something that happened in the past that is unfortunate. Not my fault. It's not my fault and I shouldn't have to. To to have I shouldn't have to pay for it so that the the resistance to the idea that that privilege that they have always assumed should be challenged or given up or that privilege the privilege should be done away with in some way or another is something that we are fighting about and will continue to fight about. And frankly Roscoe I really don't know how it works itself out.

Speaker 11 00:25:38.030
Yeah you did say one thing earlier which I stood in the back of our minds that you really didn't care about what part of Africa we came from and from a genealogical point of view. And yet at the same time the strength of black people in America in part is going to be related to the extent to which. Black people see themselves as a significant cultural historical and economic force and also have some political roots and political ties with the struggles of other black people in the world. And I know you did mean that you aren't interested in those struggles but in a sense I think what Alex Haley. He may not have meant to do but ended up doing. Was to build that bridge between black Americans. And how well this is assessed as in Africa and I'm talking about this move for eradication or at least amelioration or neutralization of this racial superiority idea. I would think that in the past ten years probably 20 years.

Speaker 13 00:26:50.310
That there has been increased respect for the African personality of the black person so that in a sense when the Italians began to fight for Italian rights they had the base of the Italian Republic of the French Republic or what have you. Now we have the base of Nigeria and Kenya and Tanzania and the Ivory Coast that we do as a people have control of our destiny everywhere except in South Africa and presume we're going to have that.

Speaker 16 00:27:21.480
So I see a political tie to this psychological and in a sense superiority has both psychological and political ramifications I think as we strengthen our political positions related to Africa. We will in fact minimize those impacts of the attitudes of racism in this society.

Speaker 17 00:27:43.890
I also think know you know it's you know when I say that I'm not interested in my particular family's origin and have you know the tribal origin in Africa I don't at all mean that I'm not interested in Africans matter of fact. You know a large part of my book is involved in trying to show the importance of that African historical and cultural connection and how it ratifies and influences and creates an American culture it's a very real one. You know one of the things that I wish to stress is that when we're talking about American culture we're talking about African. African involvement in the. In that culture. But what I'm concerned with too and I agree with you that this that there needs to be that. That connection that sense of identification with Africa. But I think that it's extraordinarily important for Afro Americans to deal with our experience in America without embarrassment and without shame. And that means that when we look at slavery I mean we shouldn't be looking overlooking slavery and saying oh we had great ancestors in Africa. Fine. That's you know we did. But what we also had was great ancestors an extraordinarily heroic ancestors who survived the experience of slavery. And one of the things that I want black odyssey to do is to bring across that dimension of courage that had to go in the day to day life of people who were slaves.

Speaker 2 00:29:09.540
And I'm sure of the book and I have already read part of the book and it does reflect the intensity of your feeling and the dramatization of what's happened to our people gets over the people that more and more black Americans will recognize what you have been saying with our guest on tonight. So the reason has been Professor Nathan Huggins who is author of the new book Black Odyssey published by Pantheon press.

Speaker 18 00:29:32.790
This is Roscoe Brown saying so long for soul of reason. This program is produced by the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University in association with NBC.

