Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.890
The Police Athletic League serves over 60,000 New York City boys and girls during the winter and summer months. Hear Connie Ford, Executive Director of the PAL, discuss its exciting programs on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:35.830
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. My guest this evening is Connie Ford, who is Executive Director of the PAL and Connie has a great reputation in New York City for working with young people. I'm glad to have you with us tonight, Connie.

Connie Ford 00:01:13.001
Thank you very much. Glad to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:14.860
Now through your efforts and the efforts of the Chairman of your board, Robert Morgenthau, the PAL has recently gotten a grant from the Criminal Justice Control Commission to help pre-delinquent boys and girls to stay out of trouble. The name of this program I believe is Yes I Can, and I thought maybe you could tell us how they can.

Connie Ford 00:01:36.630
[laughs] Well Yes I Can is a program which we have, just as you said just got funded for, and the acronym stands for Youth Enrichment Services through Cooperation Achievement Now.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:51.223
And if they do that they certainly will stay out of trouble.

Connie Ford 00:01:53.291
[laughs] I think so, I really think so. And the overall objective, objectives of this program is to try to prevent delinquency prone youngsters from entering the full feel of criminal activities.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:06.580
Well I mean you say that, how are you going to approach that? I believe that the youngsters have already have had some contact with law, which means that your objective is to keep them from having further contact with the law.

Connie Ford 00:02:18.492
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:19.481
And how do you propose to do that in this project?

Connie Ford 00:02:22.090
Well most of the youngsters would be referred to us from the criminal Juvenile Aid Bureau in the Bronx. The program is housed in one of our centers in the South Bronx, Lynch Center. And the referrals will be basically coming from Youth Aid Division 8. And we have, besides our regular recreation program where we'll set up individualized recreational plans for these young people, we'll have individual counseling family counseling, testing of all kinds, remediation. And a new concept which we feel, as far as PAL is concerned, a stipend for the young people to, for a job type situation, where they will actually be assigned, as a part of their whole involvement in this program, a work experience, and they will be paid as a small stipend for this work experience.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:15.310
I think that's a very creative approach. Now I gather in doing this you have some objective in terms of doing more than just giving youngsters some money. Is this, what is the nature of this objective? Is it to give them pride, is to teach them about work, or is just keep them out of trouble?

Connie Ford 00:03:31.270
Well it's, it's to raise his own self-esteem and make him feel, make it, make him feel that he is worth something, or she is worth something. And that, and also that would make him realize in order to earn something, you have to work for it and it won't, the stipend is not a handout. The child will sit down and actually work out his whole program with a social worker, and it will be like a contract devised between the social worker and the child as to how he will go, progress from one step to the next to receive a stipend.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:03.662
Now I understand that in the past, the Criminal Justice Control Commission is more or less focused on providing arms and support for the police. And now we are talking about prevention. To what extent is this a change in the emphasis of this organization or to what extent is it something that is just being done on a trial basis?

Connie Ford 00:04:24.550
Well from what I've been following just recently in the newspapers and, I think as a general opinion, that working, the greatest problem in the crime area right now young people. Here in New York City, young, the crimes are being committed now by younger, younger children, as young as 10 years old. And so the focus really right now is on the juvenile offender. Even the entire criminal system has been re, reorganized and restructured, trying to find some way to handle the juvenile offender. And definitely an organization or, they are a governmental agency, like the Law Enforcement Assistance Agency, should come up and should use their money rather than buying tanks and handguns of all types for police departments, should put their money, focus it on, on these, on studies and on programs that would work to try to change the direction of a young child so we won't need the type of corrective weapons that they have.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:25.392
Now when you talk about the Police Athletic League I know many times the public is confused as to whether the Police Athletic League is an official arm of the police department or is it related, and so on? So maybe you could clarify that for us right now.

Connie Ford 00:05:39.740
Well we're not a part of the police police department, we receive no funds from the police department at all. What we are there, sort of, I guess you could call it a stepchild, in some respect. The Commissioner, Police Commissioner Michael Card, is honorary president of the PAL, and there is a close relationship. Many of our programs are run by community relations police officers in the different precincts throughout the city. But we are not officially a part of the police department. We are privately funded but through private donations and corporations, foundations, things like that. But we receive no money from the police department's budget, per se.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:24.560
Now are any police staff officially assigned your staff, or is anyone from the police department works with your staff working on a volunteer basis?

Connie Ford 00:06:34.250
We have both. We have what we call a liaison unit which is made, actually made up of five men, a sargeant and four police, police officers. They in turn supervise all the community relations men that are conducting the PAL programs throughout the city. And this is where, this is our connection, our core, our basic connection with the police department.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:57.201
I got the impression that, over the years, the way in which the PAL started was the friendly cop on the beat who got some kids together we knew, brought them into the station house, organized games and sports around that, and then from there the PAL sort of developed as an outreach. Now that was 40, 50, 60 years ago. I guess now you're saying that it's more in terms of a normal youth-serving agency which does happen to have some relationship to the police department but it's not officially a part of the police department.

Connie Ford 00:07:30.680
That's the idea. [crosstalk] Very, very true we started, originally, we were started by a police officer, and just in that manner. But it has been, it has grown now where just a police officer could not do it, naturally with the emphasis now on policemen doing policemen's work, it's almost impossible for police to do the type of work that we're doing.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:49.950
Yet I believe your chairman of your board is Robert Morgenthau, who's the District Attorney for Manhattan. And is this something that's just happened or is this part of the way in which the organization works, because there seems to be a heavy tie-in with law and law enforcement.

Connie Ford 00:08:07.340
I think this just happened. It's not a part, it's not, it's not a requirement that you become Manhattan District Attorney to become president ofthe Police Athletic League. It just so happens that Mr. Morgenthau was also the federal prosecutor here in New York and now he is the Manhattan district attorney. I think he's just, we're just very fortunate to have him.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:28.811
His interest comes from a commitment to prevent crime, obviously.

00:08:33.532.0000000000582
Quite, very much so.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:34.851
Now going back to the Yes I Can program. Here we have a program that's localised in the Bronx, one of the centers, and is attempting to do a, make a different approach to preventing delinquency: improving pride, getting role models, having social work, et cetera. One of the criticisms of these special projects is that all this money is poured into one neighborhood. How, if the project is going to be successful, is it going to be replicated in other neighborhoods? What pressure does that put on a social agency like the PAL?

Connie Ford 00:09:09.080
I think this is something that we're all very very much aware of. But you have to realize that the Police Athletic League has been an organization that has been known for boxing, track, baseball, and in order for us to make inroads in the area of direct total service to a young child, I think we have to be able to get involved in this types of programs and fund this, we'll be able to institutionalize some aspects of these programs that we have. This is why we're going heavily into trying to get into these types of programs, to sort of give a different dimension to the Police Athletic League and making people aware that PAL is capable of delivering total service to young people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:53.510
You in a sense anticipated one of the questions I was going to ask and that is about the heavy emphasis on athletics in the PAL. For example some people feel that if you keep young boys and girls busy in athletics—and certainly PAL has an outstanding record in track and field, in boxing, and baseball, and to a certain extent in basketball—you kept these kids busy. Isn't that enough? Why do you have to go out and try to be a social worker, as some people say, why do you have to coddle these kids? What do you, how do you respond to that type of question?

Connie Ford 00:10:24.950
Well I think the, I feel the best way to respond to that is by just looking at the so-called top athlete today, and so many of them have not really fulfilled their upmost desire, and that is a college education to be able to stand on their feet once they've finished playing the top sport the sport that they've, the sport that they're in. And I feel that just the sport alone is not enough to give a child a full satisfying, satisfying experience. And if the PAL is to survive in these times, we have to be able to change our direction and be able to reach out and touch a child in every way, in every walk of life. And that even means going into his home and dealing with the child's parent, his brothers and sisters, and everyone else in his total environment.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:12.440
You made a key statement. You said if the PAL is to survive, and of course this is one of the things that a number of people in the community is concerned about, that the agency's main priority is for the agency to survive, rather than the agency's main priority being to serve the society again. I know that PAL was trying to do this. But why is the focus on agency survival? If someone else can do the job better, shouldn't someone else do the job?

Connie Ford 00:11:39.501
Truly I fully, fully agree with that. And I think this is, I know this is a reason why we've looked at PAL. If we could only provide baseball, basketball, and boxing, then we become just like any other ordinary agency. Not that I'm saying that this is not sufficient to survive on, but I feel that we have to become much more involved in the development of young people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:01.401
Well what about your funding sources and so on? You're not officially funded by the police department. You do get some grants from federal government, as in the case of the Yes I Can project. How do you survive? How do you develop your support?

Connie Ford 00:12:14.810
Well we have a full time, we call him a Director of Development. He actually is a fund raiser. It's on full time and he does an outstanding job. We raised over a million one last year from the general public and from foundations and corporations. We also have city contracts for the operations of 13 centers, which were cut drastically last year, latter part of last year and the early part of this year through the city's crisis. But I think I, we feel again what's really helping PAL to survive is the fact that we are addressing ourselves to the needs of young people and to the needs of the communities that we're servicing. And it's been shown I think, by the response that we're getting from the general public. Last year support from the general public was very, wasn't as heavy as it is for the first five months of this year. The general public has really just contributed very heavily these, the first five months of 1976 to really support the Police Athletic League.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:18.590
Well if anyone in the audience happens to want to support the Police Athletic League, what are some of the ways that they could support the League?

Connie Ford 00:13:26.510
Well first they can just send their dollars to the Police Athletic League at 34 and a half East 12th Street, New York City, 10003. Or make their check out to the Police Athletic League and get in contact with any community relations police officer in the city on their home precinct if they wanted to. They can even earmark their money for that precinct's program if they'd like to, therefore making sure that the money remains within their own local precinct and knowing that the children in their area are being serviced by

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:01.192
And what about volunteering? Can they volunteer?

Connie Ford 00:14:03.261
Yes they can definitely volunteer. We thrive on volunteers. This is another way that we survive.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:09.530
And of course that's what it's all about. And I think that what you've been telling us tonight is that the PAL is an organization that attempts to serve the needs of society. It is very much needed and with people like Connie Ford as the Executive Director and the type of staff you have, I think New York City is well served. We're talking with Connie Ford who is Executive Director of the PAL. And as we were saying, I think New York City is well served by having a person like you in leadership capacity. But one of the questions that comes up frequently in terms of working with delinquent youth and young people who might have problems is what kind of people do you really need? How many Connie Fords are there around? What kind of leadership do you have? What kind of role models do you have? What about that? What's your opinion about the type of person that is really needed to work with young people who might be in trouble?

Connie Ford 00:15:00.320
Well I think we really need people who are sort of committed to what they're doing. They have to fully understand the type of child that they're working with. I don't mean that they have to be so steeped in psychology or the psychological approach to handling children but they have to be sympathetic to the child, and be able to deal with this child where the child is and not try to move them, move them into a plateau where the worker is, and just try to work with them from that, from the point of where the child is. And then, then if the worker has skills, and the program is built properly, the, hopefully the two getting together, the marriage of the worker with the skills and the understanding and the, the ability to recognize the problems of a child to be able to work with them.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:49.550
Well as someone who's involved in social work, how do you feel climbing this steep mountain of oppression, of poverty, of delinquency? Sometimes when you go home don't you feel that maybe we ought to just stop approaching it this way and change the basic society? How do you, how do you really feel about that?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:13.820
Well I guess I do at times, but then every time when you get down to, to your worst moment something good happens and it sort of changes, says well it makes you realize I make you feel, well I've done something worthwhile today. So you never really leave completely devastated at, at any one time because of something, there always seems to be a balance of when something seems to be going completely wrong, something turns right around and gives you a real, real uplift, making you realize what gosh I'm fine, I'm really doing something anyhow.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:45.920
Well I can see that that has infused your personality, but in the black community in particular, those of us who are black find a tremendous amount of despair. A lot of our people just feel that "what's the use of keeping on" and "we really can't make it." Yet, I know with the leadership of groups like the "Amsterdam News" they are starting a war on crime. There are other groups who are doing things to improve the school programs. There are groups like the Black Theater Alliance that are doing things in terms of helping to get theater moving and culture moving. What is the role of people like a Connie Ford, in mobilizing the resources of the black community to deal with those concerns that impinge on us?

Connie Ford 00:17:32.991
Well you're really asking a question that's a soul searching

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:34.723
Well this is what the black community is asking [crosstalk] of people like, say you have a position of leadership. I have a position of leadship. This is what the public is asking of us. Now how do, how do we respond to this? how can we meet this challenge more effectively?

Connie Ford 00:17:47.480
Well first, I personally have to be a role model. I have to, if I am to, if I am (and I feel I am) in a position of leadership, I have to act that part, or be that part—not act, be the part—of a leader. And not be someone that young people can look up to and say well gee here's someone who's not only made it but has been able to look at, who is able to look back and reach his hand out and say come on up. And not stay within, not to live within what everyone is saying that we can't, we cannot change or we have no, no, no chance for improvement. We have to also in, get together with people like myself to be able to open up to young people, especially, to let them know that things are not, there, there is no such thing as despair and that we must constantly keep on striving. And how do we strive, by an education is our key. And no one can, should tell you that you should, that you shouldn't go to school, and that you don't need a college degree or you don't need some sort of education. That basic thing is that you do need to be educated to be able to stand up in this world and fight for your position, and that's what we have to do is to fight for our position. And I don't mean just fighting on the street for it. I mean we fight for it in the, in the boardrooms of companies, but you have to be qualified to fight there. I don't feel that we can be tokens any longer. We have to be really qualified people to take our positions and in society and be able to answer, address ourselves to a problem and come up with the answer.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:19.370
Now in implementing this philosophy at PAL, what are some of the things that you are trying to get the agency to do, aside from Yes I Can, to diversify some of its outreach. For example, do you do anything in the area of black history? Do you do anything in the area of black culture? Do you do anything in the area theater and dance? Because we know you're well-known for your track and your baseball and your basketball. What are some of these other things that, in your role as director of the PAL, you're doing to bring out some of these needs and concerns of the black community?

Connie Ford 00:19:51.320
Well we have, I feel, a very strong theater, music, dance, and drama program. And it is headed by a woman who is dedicated, who is concerned about young people, black and white or any color. And she happens to be a black woman. And this is a real true black expression to, given to young people, an opportunity to express themselves through these, through these mediums. She's a capable person. We have also, we have

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:24.681
Natalie said all these wonderful things about her, what's her name?

Connie Ford 00:20:27.840
[laughing] Kitty Kirby.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:28.861
[laughter] I know Kitty I think she's been on our show before.

Connie Ford 00:20:31.821
Excellent person.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:32.240
I think she should get the recognition she deserves.

Connie Ford 00:20:33.602
[laughing] Fine. And then we also have the black heritage programs in our centers. We have in all of our libraries a black heritage section. And it, but see again, it's that problem of turning people around, making them realize that the library is in the center for use, not just to be a showpiece. It's re-educating the center people, to make them realize that there should be a scheduling of a library period in their programming. And this is, I think is my role as the Executive Director, to make sure that the person who's planning program in PAL does have this in his program planning for the total agency.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:17.470
One of the things that you mentioned as you were talking, you said not only do we deal with black youth, we deal with youth of all backgrounds. And of course that's key, you're director of a city organization. It so happens that the majority of the young people you come in contact with a Black or Hispanic. But there are a number of white youngsters that you come in contact with. And many times, because you're dealing with youngsters who might cut across the socioeconomic spectrum, you deal with some youngsters who come from backgrounds that are themselves deprived. And you know poverty exacerbates, increases racial tensions and hostilities. What are some of the things you do in PAL to try to diminish these hostilities between ethnic and racial groups, between Blacks and Puerto Ricans, Blacks and whites, Puerto Ricans and whites?

Connie Ford 00:21:58.812
No specific program geared for, say, racial harmony. No. I think our basic operations were centers. There are interchanges and centers and different contests, and using the sports again as a means, our contests, our poetry contests, our brotherhood contests, where the winners go from one center to, to the next just to show their works and their material is shown at each center. The exchange of staffs from one center to another, which is, was never really just done to help the black-white situation or racial situation, it was just done for better, for learning process for staff. The, we have found, I found I feel, that is that there has not been that much of a racial problem when children are really involved, and like what they're doing. We put the, we put the racial problem in, when I say we I mean the adult.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:02.041
Yet it is not unusual for a group of youngsters from one particular ethnic neighborhood to be going to play a ballgame in another neighborhood and feel [crosstalk] that if they win the game they better start running and home [crosstalk] about two minutes before the game is over. And I would think that as a social agency you really have a responsibility to take some active steps to diminish that type of racial hostility. I really can't accept the point that just putting them together they gonna come together and love each other.

Connie Ford 00:23:29.491
No

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:29.493
Racism is virulent. It exists in New York City. It exists most among poor people. There are tremendous clashes between Blacks and Puerto Ricans in some neighborhoods, between Puerto Ricans and whites, and so on, now. And I'm sure that as you think about this you are aware of some other things that you have done and maybe your staff can do to deal with this. I know of a couple myself in terms of providing counselors to work with the young people in the centers. And one of the key things in those discussions with those counselors that I recall was talking about the ethnic tensions.

Connie Ford 00:24:06.001
Yes that's very true, it's happening right now in two of our centers, especially. This is another experiment, well this is an experiment that we're doing, trying to find, to show that we do need counselors—when I say counselors I mean trained social work counselors. To work, to operate in our centers, to actually help when in all situations, not just in racial tension situations, but in family crisis situations and just in the situation where one child can't relate to another within the center structure itself. And this, yes this is I would say one of the ways that we are trying to do this.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:41.311
Because I believe that unless New York City, and other large cities like New York, tackle head on this question of ethnic and racial conflicts, that the cities really will be torn asunder. A,nd it's the responsibility of social agencies and leaders like you to organize overt programs to reach out and deal with this issue. I know some people say when you talk about a brotherhood that just makes it worse, and in a certain sense they may be true. Yet on the other hand, when you're dealing in the area of sports, in the area of interaction, where there's so much potential for conflict yet there's so much potential for good. Seems to me you need to maximize that type of activity. Which leads me to ask the question, do you have any human relations training of any large magnitude for your staff? Because largely your staff are part time people, sometimes not always as professional as others because of your budgetary situation, and the need to use people from your local neighborhoods. Well what have you been thinking about in terms of working with your staff in human relations so that that can then filter out to the youngsters you working with?

Connie Ford 00:25:47.850
With our key staff—when I say key, a full time staff, the year around staff—this is a part of the, of our ongoing center directors meetings. They do discuss their problems around situations like this, but we have not gotten to the point, I think it's a financial reason, and we realize it, that we do need type of,  type of communication skills. And in any meetings for our staff people whereby they're given the opportunity to really ventilate their own feelings about the, the, not only the racial conflicts but other conflicts, other problems within the agency. Maybe even conflicts with me, you know, because I'm sure that sometimes they may think what I'm doing is not the proper thing that they should be doing. But there is a feeling if they don't really want to bring it out. And this is something that we are working on, where matter of fact, we are working on a proposal to try to get funding to come up with a comprehensive training program for all staff which would be a, an ongoing training program using outside consultation which would really focus in on the problems that we see in PAL. Which is staffing, staffing not only us staff and individual centers but staff relationships with, within themselves, within their own units, and within the total PAL structure and relationship with outside of the center and with other agencies.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:13.280
Well, I've had many people from other social agencies on the program and they almost all say the same thing. Which would lead me to ask the question is, to what extent do agencies that work with young people need to work with each other in order to improve their communication, in order to improve their skills. Because it seems almost of a duplication for each one of these agencies to be going out and starting these staff training programs over and over again. Isn't there some way of social agencies working together in other words don't you social workers talk with each other a little bit more than [unintelligible].

Connie Ford 00:27:47.171
Well it's happening. [crosstalk] We think it's really happening, it's the bureau, the partisan Welfare Council has started a council, a sort of a meeting of where all our staffs can come together for training, which has been very good, but its only hope so far has been for like Executive Directors. And I don't know if that's, that's not enough.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:10.571
[crosstalk] That's not the level, the level needs to be the people who were

00:28:12.284
Who were actually dealing with, with the people that we're working with, really. And our interest really is to get down to to our staff, the people who are really working, you know working with young people, because of the fact we realize that there is, there is a vacuum there.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:28.750
Well I think that you are aware of this, and I think as a result of our discussion tonight our audience is certainly aware of this. And we recognize that organizations like PAL have a tremendous task to perform in this city and with people like Connie Ford working with us, I think we'll make it. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Connie Ford, who is executive director of the PAL.

