Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.590
What happens to a high school youth who gets 200 college scholarship offers because he's a basketball star?. Is there too much emphasis on sports in the black community?. Hear Bob Williams, founder of The Sports Foundation and Director of Community Programs for the New York City Bicentennial Corporation, answers these questions on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:41.650
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:08.650
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" is Bob Williams, who is founder of the Sports Foundation and Director of Community Programs for the New York City Bicentennial Corporation. Glad to have you with us tonight Bob.

Bob Williams 00:01:19.841
Nice to be -- nice being with you again.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:22.481
Well, so much is happening in the world of sports now: stories all over the newspaper and television about the overemphasis on recruiting high school youth athletics and the extreme cost of college programs. The allegation by somebody like Bill Bradley who says that college basketball and college football are really semi-professional and we ought to really admit it. College high school kids like Butch Lee of Clinton getting 200 plus scholarship offers to go to college. What does this mean? What impact does this have on Black youth?

Bob Williams 00:01:53.110
Well I think this has a tremendous impact on Black youth. I think that there is not an overemphasis of sports. I think that the over empha--emphasis is on misdirected counseling for youth who are participating in sports. I think that you have to have a--accessible to youth who are in the street--facilities in the street. So that they can walk in and say hey you know I want to go to school or I have all these letters. What do they mean? And I think a youngster like Butch Lee, who has participated in the Sports Foundation programs as a youth coming up, is faced with a problem that a youngster like Dean Meminger was faced with. And, you know Dean has a slightly different background in terms of going to parochial school instead of a public school. But in Butch's case I feel pretty good about it because I know John Wiles very well, the coach at a Clinton High School--I know he follows up on his youngsters. I think though those people who--I can think of many other youngsters who didn't have the kind of counseling that they should have had and are back in the streets today--of going to school, entered, and right back in the streets today.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:58.240
Now when we talk about following up and counseling, I think we are talking about this question about the fact that high school athletes--even junior high school athletes--because they are in athletics do not get the pressure from their teachers, the guidance from their coach, the help even from people in the community to say look let's get your education. Let's learn how to handle the language, let's learn some particular skill, that gives you a degree that you can come back to your community, and not only help yourself by making an income but also help your community. Too frequently it's "Oh you're going to get a scholarship here and they're going to give you a car here and they're gonna give you a job here and you know make the pros and you gonna be able to wear some fly clothes." Now, what really can be done? For example, what is the Sports Foundation doing--as one major organization devoted to this--to help sort of turn this around, to help balance the seesaw a little bit? Because it certainly is far, far over-balanced in terms of, if you play ball you're going to make it. And of course, the statistics indicate that even only one percent of the college players make it and if you go to high school it's one tenth of one tenth of 1 percent who make it.

Bob Williams 00:04:08.201
What I think first of all, when you're talking about the youngsters that we are talking about, if we want to agree with it or not, they will essentially be leaders of the communities and leaders of their peers. And I think that it's important that professionals--those who are the image makers, yourself included--have sort of spoken about the academics, you know the--the ultimate--the bottom line, so to speak, when a youngster is going through all of these things. I was impressed with Butch Lee because the bottom line here is that Butch Lee wants a degree. Wherever he goes, he wants a degree, and the one time they interjected his mother's thoughts was: that Butch get a degree. I think that this is essential. I think that, you know, academicians have recorded the history of the usury of athletes, and I think that the youngsters today, when they listen to the pros such as Meminger and Archibald and Monroe and Willis Reed and, and all the other great guys, that--that think enough to come back to the community and speak--Dick Barnett included--they--that the message is very plain. You know, you're not going to be a pro and you know, we--we weren't--we didn't we--this was not an American dream for us. We were pros because we were great in high school, we had good PR, we went to college and we were--our names were--an entity, some kind of entity.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:33.550
[crosstalk] And also you were lucky, because even with all the great skill in the world, kids who get hurt--men who had their careers destroyed because of a knee injury or what have you--to be able to fall back on something is important. The other point--which I think is also important--is that even if one does get to be a pro, even in the pro ranks--even though the salaries for example in basketball average forty thousand dollars--forty thousand dollars can go very, very fast when you have taxes to pay and you living up and have 10 suits that you're buying and that career is over. You know when they put that cut on you, and they said "Look, you played a good ball game but it's over," when you look over your shoulder and say "where am I going?" you really have to have some type of education, some type of skill. And it could be--could be a variety of things. It doesn't have to be in the traditional professions of law or teaching or medicine. It could range from all the way from business to accounting to architecture to public relations.

Bob Williams 00:06:33.651
Absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:06:34.201
And, too frequently--it's my opinion, I think is your opinion too--that the bottom line is the won and loss record. It's the coach's salary. Rather than what's going to happen to those kids and to the other youngsters that these kids will have impact on. Could you tell us a little about some of the actual programs that Sports Foundation runs, in order to try to rectify this, and in order to make the bottom line your education and your service to the community?

Bob Williams 00:07:06.301
Okay, well as a--I guess a precept to the bottom line--our philosophy is in many instances: if you don't know where you're going, how will you know when you got there? We feel as though all of our youngsters walking towards a--a position where they can come back and help build the community from within. If this is so we feel that the programs that we project, should be projected by the image makers, the Memingers, etc. The Bill Bradleys. And we should also let them hear--let them hear now--where they should be going. And where they should be going as towards getting some kind of skill that will be able to be marketable at some point. And our programs at the foundation are basically clinics. We--we, we like to deal with the educational aspects of the sports based on a progression of activities etc. And the--the clinical format helps us develop individual skills of the youngsters and self testing activities. We develop teams, we develop leagues, in that way we sort of organize the youngsters in sort of--community precincts, if you will.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:16.610
Of course, you begin to get another principle which has--goes beyond education--that's mass recreation sports.

Bob Williams 00:08:22.552
Yes. For

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:23.351
everybody [crosstalk], not just for the most talented.

Bob Williams 00:08:25.881
Absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:26.291
So as a result you have a variety of activities which eventually culminate in what I believe you call the Harlem Junior--.

Bob Williams 00:08:33.341
[crosstalk] Yes, we have the Harlem Junior Olympics.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:34.549.9999999999418
But the point is that there are even gradations within that, in terms of levels of ability--

Bob Williams 00:08:39.330.0000000000582
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:39.335.0000000000582
--ages, and I would not want to compliment the sports foundation for being one of the first major sports organizations--other than possibly the PAL in New York City--to focus on women's sports.

Bob Williams 00:08:51.430
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:51.433
Because too frequently girls and women's sports are ignored--and many years before it was popular, through equal opportunity legislation, as the Sports Foundation was pushing for women's sports. So that's one aspect of your program and I believe you have another very strong component--an area of guidance--which really is where it's at. You've got-- you used the sports to get the kids active, to have them utilize their time. But then what do you do in the area of guidance, how do you approach that?

Bob Williams 00:09:19.820
Well, you know, Sports Foundation, we are currently holding a fund raising campaign because we, you know you need staff to follow up on people. And we've been very fortunate that we made a tape with the Dean Meminger speaking for the Sports Foundation here at NBC. We--we have in girls sports 10 or seven different activities. Little girls are swimming, playing the martial arts, basketball, handball, volleyball, etc.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:52.971
Tennis.

Bob Williams 00:09:53.771
Tennis, yes. And in the area of guidance we feel that we couple tha with health. We--everyone that comes into the program, we try to use as a prerequisite that they have a complete physical examination. We speak to the youngsters about their, you know, their, their health status so to speak. And we've picked up a lot of things that perhaps if a youngster did get hurt we would be charged with negligence. Or someone [unintelligible] should be charged for negligence--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:19.653
At least the society should be charged with--

Bob Williams 00:10:21.020
[crosstalk] Absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:21.503
Negligence if they don't get the--

Bob Williams 00:10:22.751
[crosstalk] Exactly.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:22.753
Exact help they need.

Bob Williams 00:10:24.020
And, we--we've gotten for youngsters, in terms of college, over four hundred doll--four hundred thousand dollars worth of scholarships for youngsters in the colleges throughout the country, both boys and girls.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:34.941
And most of these youngsters, upwards of 85 percent of them, are graduating I believe.

Bob Williams 00:10:40.201
Absolutely. Last year was the first year we had our first graduating class, if you will. And Cecil Seaver, one of our youngsters who graduated from Lincoln University, ran the program for us. Rilmel Bowens, who was the Chairman of our council in Harlem, which represented 74,000 youth, went out to Marquette, thanks to Dean Meminger's influence out there. And I understand she ran an Upward Bound program there at--at Marquette in the summer. And kids, the graduating class gave her a watch as a gift. So she's doing her thing out there in Milwaukee.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:12.030
Now in terms of this guidance, because this is so important. Some of the things that I believe you do have to do with helping youngsters--even those who don't have, or even especially those who don't have athletic ability--to decide on career objectives--

Bob Williams 00:11:28.830
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:28.832
Decide on what kind of colleges--

Bob Williams 00:11:30.790
Yes.

00:11:30.792
Might help to contribute to these career objectives and then to actually do some advocacy work, with the counselors and the admissions officers in those colleges, to help these youth get into school. And then once they in school, help them to survive. Because that is one of the problems that black and other minority group youth from poor backgrounds have, because of the inadequate quality of education and many of the inner city high schools. These young people just don't have the skills to step right in necessarily. Not all of them are bereft of skills,b ut many of them don't have the skills to step right in and really keep up with the work unless they get some guidance or some help. So could you tell us a little something about some of the things you've done along those lines?

Bob Williams 00:12:14.610
Well, first of all, my point about having no funds, or the lack of funds for personnel, was that we tried to build technology into the foundation. You know, we need the support of the community because we feel as a community program--we feel as a program that supports a healthy climate in New York City--and we have started a computer file for our youngsters. So that instead of needing a very large staff to follow up on youngsters--because that's the most important thing in life really, follow-up--we can can get general things that are happening in blocks of time. And we can go to sensitize our cause and our computer files, so that we can pull out the youngsters who would most benefit, or who would benefit at all from some, of the things that are happening. For example, a S.A.T. exam or a P.S.A.T exam is going to be given, and the youngsters don't get the guidance in school, or there are no circulars in school where you know, the youngsters know where it is. It was given in December--I think December 3rd this year. There were so many kids who didn't know about it, but we had all of our kids alerted because we just sent out a notice to all of them and then we followed up with a phone call. So we have a large phone bill. We don't have an office right now, but at this point we have a computer. And we can --and we can deal with these--these types of things.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:30.630
When you say a computer, so that the audience will be clear, you have access to a computer--

Bob Williams 00:13:33.392
Certainly, access to a computer. [laughs]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:34.071
[crosstalk] That's a multi-thousand dollar facility. [laughs] And what I believe you're doing is working with some of the industrial corporations in the city and some of the civic organizations to help create a journal. Yes share will be made available at the time of the Harlem Junior Olympics.

Bob Williams 00:13:51.810
One one dream that we had was to get into a position so that we didn't have to go to foundations and and depend on donors from the traditional sources. Every year you it's very hard to get a community program going when you have to depend on that type solicitation every year. So over the years we have developed certain fundraising modalities such as the High School Basketball Classic which will be played May 20 third this year hopefully at the Feld forum we're in negotiation now and we have the help of the business community in a great New Yorker Lou Rudin who is the executive vice president of the Association for a Better New York which is some 200 or so businesses in New York that are strictly for New York who want to promote New York as a better place to live. And this is essentially what the thrust of the foundation is. You know I'm I'm in New York. I was born raised educated in the Browns. You know I as soon as I got my first job I worked in Harlem and now I work in the with the New York City bicentennial Corporation which I think is a very significant thing for all New Yorkers to be a part of and get involved in.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:07.560
Tonight we're talking with Bob Williams is the founder of the Sports Foundation and director of community programs for the New York City bicentennial Corporation. And we've been talking about the role of sports in the lives of black people and in the black community and the activities of people like Bob and some of our sports heroes like team manager and Bill Bradley and Dick Barnett Hal Monroe Tony Archibald.

Speaker 10 00:15:33.210
If some of the audience might want to help with the Sports Foundation our they get in touch with and how well they could write to a sports foundation or to my attention 150 West One hundred and Fortieth Street New York New York. One hundred and thirty and we will get back to them. You know we we have certain things that money can't buy you know. We we need the human resource because we have a human organization and it's through those efforts. We will grow and continue to grow.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:08.340
Is very interesting that in the whole area of community relations we find a number of voluntary organizations. Groups like yours dealing with anything ranging from political activity to how to sports to education and so much of the energy is energy that comes from people who do this beyond their job. You are unpaid as the director of the foundation. Whereas you had jobs which you were involve payment for working with youth basically this is an extension of that and there are many many other people. How do you see volunteerism and community participation in New York City. This really sort of leads into your new responsibility as director of community programs for New York City bicentennial Corporation. But it's a larger issue that is the role of the citizens in New York City the people the energy of the communities the energy of individual people in those communities mobilizing themselves in many instances on a volunteer basis to help make New York City a better place to live and also to help improve opportunities for minority the poor white black. What have you. Well my my answer to that really is Sports Foundation was organized.

Speaker 10 00:17:32.290
Initially as an alternative to the anti-poverty program. We felt that if some citizens made an honest effort at having a structure developed in the community and sort of had a concept of revolving door because I knew that it had to be a voluntary situation I couldn't very well go out and acts and negotiate for money in good faith with my salary involved. It would put me in a compromising position. You know off the top and I think that we gave an honest effort. We were there through very tough times through good times and in this way. And our philosophy was that do it in a professional fashion have the money to pay people for the responsibility to be with kids or young people or people when they were supposed to be there. And we felt that we had to go beyond the whole volunteer concept because if your daughter gets sick you know and it's a volunteer situation she may take priority. If your daughter gets sick and the wife is there and it can be handled you can run them to the hospital and get to the responsibility that you can pay the doctor bill. You know you may be able to push yourself a little bit and get there so you don't have a group of disappointed young people.

Speaker 11 00:18:44.830
That's true. But your leaders the people created this basically a volunteer board.

Speaker 12 00:18:49.330
Absolutely. My point is this that when you run a program like this and people see you function like this they are going to watch you because people are so sensitive to the rip off that they're going to watch you. And after a while has that almost become a religion that you aren't paid. You know the volunteer group is really volunteer. They are pros they're getting it done and they better be pros because that's been a full time of getting it done. But when they when they direct their time to it it's a hundred percent effort and it takes an effort from a lot of people sports foundation is a salt and pepper shaker. We have black people white people yellow people are as we will everybody is helping us because they believe in the concept that we should invest in our youth and the community that does not invest in this use has to be spiritually poor. And I feel doomed to failure.

Speaker 11 00:19:37.960
Well another point however and I believe in this volunteerism personally and institutionally and as a civic venture. But it does raise a question which I frequently ask myself and asked our guest on soul of reason and that is that many of these things are things that have agencies and responsibilities in the public domain. Otherwise these are things that the people we pay as public servants as teachers as coaches as recreation directors ought to be doing. It's true that the volunteer is the conscience of the public and it's sort of the watchdog of the public but so frequently I get the feeling that the volunteer people are ahead of the people who are the agencies whose official responsibility it is to do this now and to be fair about it. We must recognize that the manpower for many of our official agencies is certainly deficient. But how do we get that balance between the responsibilities of the public so of a society to provide services for local communities and the responsibilities and the activities of volunteers. So that really is a key question and that probably is the key question about how we can make New York City a better place to live to make it a place as people say can be governed and governed by the people.

Bob Williams 00:20:58.940
Well I think number one you have to realize that a traditionally classically if you study the system at all or just are a victim of the system you realize that there is apathy apathy in bureaucracy. You realize that there are disincentives you realize that no one is motivated to do the job.

Speaker 11 00:21:19.460
Why I ask that question.

Bob Williams 00:21:20.930
Well you know you have to look at it in this regard. No one wants to step on anyone else's toes. And the way you know the Machiavellian the whole concept is if anyone in the line is making waves you squash him you get him out the way so that we can keep rolling an even keel and even keel has a historical background background of patronage you know when you when you when you go into the whole Civil Service was created so to eliminate patronage but it built it another bit of complacency which is now in to make anybody mad as apathy you know.

Speaker 12 00:21:55.520
So you get security but but then you can be apathetic because they can't make you do the job any faster than you want to do the job. I think that that's one thing. I think however the most important thing is that people must understand the system. I think that they must be advocates out there who who explain exactly how things should be done and then go out there and become activist and try to get them done. I think that the point of reality is sort of an aesthetic observation if you will. And I think that that the aesthetic observation is this that we always must be able to look at life through our eyes and not just with them. And I think if you look at life through your eyes you deal with what is you know and what is is that there is an apathetic bureaucracy and there is a matter of young people being misled and unlearned etc.. And I think that once you you come to grips with that you have to deal with the youngsters who are being not being serviced and tried to serve as them. And at the same time on another level deal with the bureaucracy as an activist as an advocate of community development except when I think that it's a it's a two tier answer. But I think that the answer can be said in one voice you know get involved attack it in a in a in a logical rational fashion and deal with the the the disaster fall out of the bureaucracy if you ever we're not a service and design.

Speaker 11 00:23:30.410
I think that's an excellent explication of politics and social interaction in a large urban community. And of course New York City is the largest and probably what we need is a greater insight into this because the magical solutions that have been proposed that communicate Control Accountability computer management management systems what have you. All of these are part of the whole process but unless you get the type of articulation that you've described between the the role of the advocate and the role of the bureaucrat and the role of the society in demanding services you won't get that because as the critical mass becomes larger and it does an urban community you have more interacting factors that you have to deal with. But let's talk about the bicentennial and community programs and what you're doing and what we are hoping for of course the bicentennial is the celebration of 1776 200 years later. And we did make it hopefully now. Dick Gregory says that there hasn't been any democratic society that's lasted two years yet. And we get them close and we've got two years to go and he says we might not make it personal. I think we'll make it. But you know how we make it we might be walking backwards. But tell us something about what you're going to do and what is anticipated for this bicentennial.

Speaker 10 00:24:56.480
Well the New York City bicentennial cooperation is the official New York city agency to handle the commemoration of the 200 years of American independence. And we have three themes there at the Centennial cooperation. One is Heritage 76 when we reflect on the past. The parts of the country the parts of the city the past of our own individual neighborhoods and communities. We have festivals 76 when we will do all of the traditional things that have have historical significance to our particular communities. And then we have a horizon 76 in which we look at the after reflecting on the past look at the future and say where we want to go we want to get from the community and my particular responsibilities to get from all people in New York City and all communities in New York City. The a declaration of aspirations the things that we want where we want to go. In the 70s and the 80s and until 20 76 and of course that's a very important point when you say all people because really you're talking about black people and white people and Asian people and people from Native American backgrounds et cetera.

Speaker 11 00:26:18.390
And to involve the people of New York City and eventually hopefully people in New York state eventually hope of people of the country. In looking at the horizons where are we going to go and realizing that you've just got in a sense started this new responsibility. I'm sure that you see it as a challenge to find ways of reaching out to communities to help them to set their aspirations high enough. Absolutely well you know the mechanisms that we're going to use will be the community planning boys the sixty two of them in the city and we feel that that is the closest to the grassroots that we can get in a structure because we're trying to hit the 62 who Community Planning Boards in two months which will be quite one a day. Ambitious and we we have three the night in fact and after that we have the borough presidents have developed the burro count bow advisory councils and these councils will forward proposals to us and we have when asked to have a group of professionals that have expertise in history education etc. and we are available we're at a 355 Lexington Avenue. One thing I forgot to mention that was the sports foundation phone number which is 2 3 4 0 300 and in New York City's bicentennial Corp. phone number is 4 9 0 8 5 6 0 0 higher and 4 9 0 8 5 6 so the new york city bicentennial corporation. Well Bob you really brought us right into almost the year 2000 and moving us closely to 1976. Our guest on tonight soul of reason has been Bob Williams founder of the Sports Foundation and we've been talking about the role of athletics in the black community in need for better counseling for black athletes and also his work as director of community programs at New York City bicentennial Corporation. Thanks for being our guest on sole reason tonight.

Speaker 13 00:28:12.660
Bob you've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience soul of reason is produced by the NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Speaker 14 00:28:37.680
Please join us again next week.

