Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:00:01.350
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that tells what's happening in Black America. Each week on NBC, leaders and movers in the Black community visit "Soul of Reason" to discuss issues of importance to Black New Yorkers. I am your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, adjunct professor of education at New York University and president of Bronx Community College of the City University of New York. And tonight on "Soul of Reason," we have with us Ellen Dempsey and Charlotte Frank from the Division of Curriculum Planning and Policy at the New York City Board of Education. And we're really glad to have you ladies with us this evening.

Charlotte Frank 00:00:36.781
Nice to be with you.

00:00:37.791
It's good to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:00:38.581
And I tell you, in the New York City schools, and there's urban schools throughout this country, people who are involved in curriculum planning really have a tough time. I know I was talking with some of my colleagues about all of the various problems that you have in the schools: the overcrowding in some schools, the integration problems, the discipline problems, the problems of youngsters with different lifestyles and language backgrounds. And I'll just begin by asking Charlotte, how do you generally approach the whole question of curriculum planning, because it's quite obvious that the schools today are really very, very different from the way they were 20 years ago or even 10 years ago.

Charlotte Frank 00:01:18.090
Well, 20 years ago and even 10 years ago and today we're still trying to identify what the problems are in New York City. We did that then, and we do that right now. And because of the problems that you have so eloquently described, we design curriculum programs that are designed to help teachers and students explore these problems and see how they can relate the present-day activities to these problems.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:01:45.671
Of course, that really is the logic that goes behind it. But as you go to the South Bronx, or you go to Bushwick, and you see blocks and blocks where houses are abandoned, torn down, burned out. And you see these young children and high school youngsters lining up to get on a bus to go to the school, and then you see the teachers come in in their cars from the suburbs, or from the more affluent sections. You really wonder how anything that goes on in those schools can be relevant to those lives of those youngsters who are in these communities that are so crowded, so burned out,wherethe drug pushers line up on the corner at 8:00 in the morning and the liquor stores open so that the winos can get their wine. How does this hit you, Ellen, when you begin to think about curriculum planning?

Ellen Dempsey 00:02:35.520
Well, Roscoe, it would be not honest to say that these problems don't severely affect the kids who are in the schools, but we hope that a lot of the curriculum planning has a lot to do with really improving their lot and opening up new horizons. And one of the programs, the New York City Scholars Program, is just such a program. It was a more specialized kind of program. But maybe if I described that for just a minute, it would really give an idea how curriculum can be used to open up a new world to many students.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:03:08.860
I think that's a very good idea because it is certainly true that the public at large focuses on things like teacher assault and various types of disruptions that go on in schools. And yet among the million and some odd pupils, and the 50 or 60 some odd teachers and supervisors, there are a lot of things that are happening that are really different from that. So why don't you tell us about this program? Now, that's the New York City Scholars Program; was that a funded program, from money outside of the schools or was that something that we just decided to take our taxpayers' money and spend it on?

Ellen Dempsey 00:03:41.821
The program was a funded program. At the moment--it is complete, and it was funded at the time as a bicentennial project and partly through the offices of Paul O'Dwyer, who at that time was able to get support from the rest of the business community to support this type of project. And what it was is we asked 160 high schools in New York City--that includes private, public, and parochial schools--to send representatives of their school who they considered their finest students, and they were the New York City Scholars. And what it was was a series of seminars set up at the host school, being the Fashion Institute of Technology, who gave their resources, and we had a series of very fine lecturers who came and spoke to the students. The lecturers spoke on the different ethnic experiences in New York City, including the Irish, Jewish, Italian, Black, and Puerto Rican. And one of our speakers was a certain Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:04:49.051
Okay, well, that gets me right down to cases because I did see these youngsters and see the way in which they responded to so many things that are going on. Now, if you look at something like that, how many youngsters, how many kids participate in this?

Ellen Dempsey 00:05:01.722
A hundred and sixty.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:05:01.726
A hundred and sixty kids? I thought it was 160 high schools. It was--

Ellen Dempsey 00:05:05.360
Yeah, there were [unintelligible] not all of the high schools in New York City were [unintelligible] responded. So we had alternates from schools who could send two if a school declined to respond. So in reality I would say there was a little over 100 schools participating and 160 youngsters.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:05:22.880
I know in talking with some of the youngsters about it, they were focusing on the ethnic experience in New York City. And there is this position that says that the ethnic experience of various groups has been pretty much the same in the urban community. More recently, some people, particularly the Black community and Hispanic community began to say that really isn't true because the color factor and the severe language difference tends to bring about the fact that the experience isn't identical. How does this influence--Charlotte, how does this influence your thinking as you begin to plan curriculum particularly in the social sciences and the arts in a school system where approximately half of the youngsters, maybe even more than half, really, are minority Black and Hispanic, or you know, Black people with the heritage of racial segregation, and Hispanic people, most of them brown and darker, who have not only a heritage of discrimination in many instances but are newcomers to our land? How does this influence your approach toward looking at ethnic groups in the city?

Charlotte Frank 00:06:34.370
I think our responsibility, Roscoe, is to try and have children be sensitive and aware that we share common problems, that the Afro-American child and the dark-skinned Hispanic child share the same problems as the social situation relates to the larger society. We have designed and we have in the planning session, in the planning stages a number of curriculum projects that I would like to share with you. We have available for New York City schools and teachers a Black Studies program for kindergartners through Grade 2, a Puerto Rican Studies program for kindergarten through Grade 2. We have an ethnic studies program for the secondary schools that speak to those common elements. For that would describe the ethnic pluralism that is the very nature of New York City, which would include the Chinese Americans, the Irish Americans, the Italian Americans, and the Puerto Ricans. In addition we have for teachers and students an extensive bibliography on African and Afro-American history for grades K to twelve. In addition we have an African history and African Studies program in the secondary schools, an Asian studies program for the secondary schools, a Latin America pre-Colombian times program for the secondary schools and a race and prejudice program in American society. All of these curriculum materials are available for teachers to implement many courses, electives for the students, and our student population--because it is so varied--will find, we will find that we had different ethnic groups in the same class sharing the same kind of teaching and learning experience.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:08:32.70.00000000005821
When I hear this, this sounds like something that's really very great. Do like you say we have a program and then I guess I say I walk into schools and I don't see many of these programs taking place. What happens? Is this a function of the initiative of the teacher, the principal, the coordinator of curriculum, because I'm sure as you describe these, these programs are probably pretty well worked out with activities and facts and information, etc. What happens between the drawing board and the place of action, a classroom in the schools? Is it really left to the wisdom and judgment of the principal or the teacher, or is there some type of general plan? Because this is what I hear as I go to community school board meetings and talk with people: "We want this. Why can't we have this?" And then you say, and Ellen says that there are these type of programs that have been designed, yet they're not being implemented in a large number of places. Now why is this?

Charlotte Frank 00:09:36.020
Well, I'm not certain that they have not been implemented in a large number of places. Many, many of the programs that I've just--really the curriculum materials that I've just described--are built into our ninth-year social studies program, which speaks to an Eastern civilization. Our 10th-year social studies program, which speaks to world history, to world history but specifically the Western civilization. Our new Holocaust curriculum is a suggested activity for the world studies program.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:10:11.990
Could you tell us a little about the Holocaust curriculum?

Charlotte Frank 00:10:14.840
Well, it's an experimental program. It's an experimental addition, and really what it does is it attempts to summarize various experiences that classroom teachers have had throughout the city in developing pilot Holocaust studies program.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:10:30.470
Maybe, for our audience who might not be aware of the Holocaust and what it means, could you talk a little about the Holocaust as a concept?

Charlotte Frank 00:10:40.520
Well, the Holocaust is the experience of Nazi Germany and the coining of the word genocide was a result of that experience in which millions of Jews and non Jews were killed in Europe during what we call the Second World War.

00:10:58.230
Now Holocaust in this sense is a specific term that relates to a particular epoch of world history.

Charlotte Frank 00:11:03.620
Yes. It was a particular experience to the Jews in Europe.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:11:08.960
Well, does the massive genocide of Russians who were non Jews by the Nazis come into this, or is this particularly related to the Jewish experience?

Charlotte Frank 00:11:19.160
No. What it attempts to do and it does indicate that there have been a series of human tragedies in our lifetime and other lifetimes. And it does speak to the Armenian experience. It does speak to the various non Jews who were also killed during that time.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:11:37.770
All right, going back to the business of getting these things implemented. Maybe you're quite right that throughout the system a lot of these programs are occurring. But as I visit schools--and I visit a number of schools, and I talk with youngsters from different backgrounds, and I raise some of these issues--apparently many of them say well that didn't happen in my class. Now, it is true that a large number of youngsters have reading problems of very serious magnitude. Ellen, as you work in this area have you found that the reading problems of the youngsters have something to do with the difficulty that they have in getting into some of these programs involving the ethnic experience?

Ellen Dempsey 00:12:24.301
Well, I think previously there has been an attitude in the schools that the main function would be to deal with the basics--you know, developing reading skills, math skills, or whatever. That attitude still exists. But I really believe personally that there was a period where the schools were involved in just doing that kind of remedial work and a lot less of what we call this kind of curriculum development. I think there is an awareness now that a lot of the basics really can be taught through the content level of really reading through history, reading through different kinds of novels, language arts, and that all those basic kinds of things that they say development in order to bring up their reading levels can happen along with these kinds of let's say ethnic learnings, and I believe that there is a definite move in a direction of a lot more of this kind of thing happening.

Charlotte Frank 00:13:30.360
May I add to it? There is a program that has been developed--in fact it's an ongoing program in a district in the Bronx, District 12, in which they have tried to develop based upon the concept of using ethnic heritage materials to teach reading skills. They have used a learning resource center that very much resembles a museum. This kind of a place, and ethnic heritage materials to teach specific reading skills, to develop specific thinking skills, and based upon the concept that the child's feeling of himself as he feels a little bit more special about himself and can relate to the materials will then develop all of those very basic skills that are necessary for a youngster to read and to write so that more and more we are using this focus to develop a minimum competency.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:14:33.892
Tonight on "Soul of Reason," we are talking with Charlotte Frank and Ellen Dempsey of the New York City Board of Education Division of Curriculum Planning and Policy, and we are talking about various curriculum developments that deal with the ethnic picture and the ethnic heritages of the various populations in our schools. And again, I really want to press this because I think it's so very important, with so many children from different ethnic backgrounds or various economic levels in our schools, and with teachers who basically because of the longevity situation have been trained in what Ellen described as a more formal approaches to teaching various subject matter areas, how do you get more of these programs implemented? For example going back into the development of the materials and the curriculums themselves, who develops them? Do you two develop them, do people who sit in your staff develop them? How are these developed? Supplementary question: Is there any parent input or student input into the development of these various programs? Ellen, why don't you give us some of your ideas on that.

Ellen Dempsey 00:15:43.290
Well, we have a system, and the system really includes getting the broadest possible input. For one thing, there's a Curriculum Council, and the council has representatives of,for example, the United Parents Association, the Council of Supervising Teachers, United Federation of Teachers. And I'm not going to go through the full membership, but it's the broadest base, and of course the Community School Board Association. And they basically are a policymaking unit. The staff of our division really deals in getting the input and staff from community school districts who are used as writers, community school districts and high schools. They are asked to come in and write and this sort of thing. It's our job really to help in the development and come through with the final product.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:16:38.470
All right, now when you say policy, could you give an example of a curriculum policy?

Ellen Dempsey 00:16:45.481
Yeah. One of the things we're talking about today, for example, is developing ethnic heritage materials is definitely a policy. That's something that's I think probably started within the last five to 10 years. You know, I couldn't say exactly, but that kind of thing becomes a policy, and then that thing is carried through by the staff.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:17:04.990
In other words, moving away from the so-called melting pot theory of curriculum, where all Americans had the same experience, and we talk about America the Beautiful as a general concept rather than dealing with the specific areas. Now, is a policy issue one that deals with which ethnic groups you develop these curriculums around? Because there must be literally a hundred and some odd ethnic groups in New York City. Is that a policy issue, or is once the policy that we're going to have ethnic curriculums established passed, then it's up to the staff to decide which ethnic curriculums?

Ellen Dempsey 00:17:40.840
Well, again, I think the policy, you know, [unintelligible] would set the staff doing whatever they had to do. And in this case the staff would really try to deal with every possible ethnic group in New York City.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:17:54.592
And the more pressure that the ethnic groups put on, the faster the staff works in developing the materials.

Ellen Dempsey 00:17:58.961
I would say there are certain political realities, yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:18:01.840
When I--and I use the term "political" in a larger sense--I think you're right. But then this raises the question I have about professional educators and being one myself. Must we wait until the rest of the world begins to crumble around us to begin to deal with some of the issues that we face in our society. I noticed you shook your head no, Charlotte. What's your feeling about your role as a curriculum planner?

Charlotte Frank 00:18:28.660
Well, I shook my head because must we wait? No, we shouldn't wait. We really should be leaders. We should be pioneers. We really should be trendsetters in what we recognize as educational leaders, in advising those powers that the kinds of approach we should take in our instructional programs.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:18:49.310
What about preparing the programs? What about getting programs that show the role of slumlords in urban communities, and the collaboration between the law enforcement units and organized crime, and pushing drugs at the corner of 145th Street and Seventh Avenue? Do you think that's something we should get into our curriculums?

Charlotte Frank 00:19:09.010
Well, I think we have to speak to the life experience, and we have to--I think that we have to address the problem of how do we survive in this city. We have to try and see if we can develop those very strong survival skills. Our youngsters come to us with certain street skills. Now, how do we help you? How do we help them using the skills that they come to us with? When we speak about a policy of including in developing ethnic heritage materials, not only--it is not really limited to just the curriculum materials we develop, it is also extended to the kinds of textbook materials that we approve. Under the decentralization law, the Chancellor has that responsibility, so that as our directors of the various educational centers review materials, unless it reflects the pluralistic nature that is a very real thing in our society, the materials will be disapproved for use in the New York City schools.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:20:05.680
In other words, you act as a censor as well as a motivator of curriculum.

Charlotte Frank 00:20:12.973
Censor...we act as a--we review materials based upon the criteria that have been listed for as those materials that are appropriate for use in New York City schools.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:20:26.050
So, if we have a publication that insists on using Negro, and not Black, would that be a role that you'd have to say,well, you think this particular provocation is somewhat demeaning, it doesn't meet the criteria? How would you deal with something like that? [crosstalk] Perfect to use as an example.

Charlotte Frank 00:20:41.502
[crosstalk] It very possibly would probably not be approved. We have just disapproved a series of materials from a major publishing house because it clearly showed through its illustrations just one ethnic group. And if we're going to have an impact, and if what we say is appropriate for our New York City schools in our curriculum developed materials,it has to also be true for our textbook materials, those materials that we use our tax levy funds for.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:21:13.360
Yeah, I'm sympathetic to the problem that you have because you are in a sense the agent of society, and in some instances your personal views have to be superseded by certain general realities. Let me give you another example. There's been a large argument about whether Black English should be used in text materials, and some schools have just forbidden them. And in a sense, the person who does that, or the arm of government that does that, in fact is acting as a censor. Now Ellen, in terms of New York City schools, do you encourage the use of Black English in materials dealing with the Black experience? How do you deal with that, and how do you deal with the argument that says, well, if this is the language that some of the youngsters speak, why not begin with their language and make the transition over to standard English? How do you deal with it?

Ellen Dempsey 00:22:02.980
Well, I think there are two things that you brought up, and part of it is a sensitivity to what people themselves want to do, or think, or be called. In the question you just asked, would you censor a book that uses the word Negro: It isn't a question of whether we want to. We have to sensitize our people to how that group feels about it, and the answer would come with that. The second part of your question...I'm sorry, could you give me the--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:22:32.441
The question that I was raising is that when you [crosstalk] feel like Black English comes up, there are two sides to the issue. How do you deal with those in dealing with material? Basically, the First Amendment of the Constitution allows us a considerable amount of freedom of expression, and in many instances when school systems have eliminated books, for a variety of reasons, eventually when they get before the courts, usually these things are overturned, and in some instances persuasion is much better than some type of arbitrary judgment.

Ellen Dempsey 00:23:07.480
Well, in terms of something like Black English, we would ask our reviewers to look technically for standard English. And then if Black English were used, what it would have to be is something that we clearly, within a dialect that's, you know, clarified. Let's say you had a novel that used Black English. The novel itself would make it clear that it was a dialect that was being used. But if what you're calling was let's say a standard language or language arts book and using Black English as a grammatical construction, you know, I don't think it would be acceptable.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:23:44.850
Okay. But this does raise a lot of questions for those of you who are involved in curriculum planning. And the question I had asked earlier, which I don't think we got into, was what is the role of the public, of the parents, the students themselves, and of the general citizenry, in dealing with curriculum? For example, many times in talking about life in the inner city, they say the school books don't really talk about the political system. They don't really talk about tradeoffs. They don't really talk about deals. They don't really talk about the way judgeships are bought, or the way in which there's collaboration between law enforcement officers sometimes and organized crime. It's as though they have to look at "Starsky and Hutch" on television to find out about this. Yet this is really part of their experience. Why is it that so many of our curriculums are so sterile in relationship to real life? Charlotte or Ellen?

Ellen Dempsey 00:24:40.392
Well, I think part of the answer is that many of these things are questions that have to be raised by the teacher and it would be really difficult to say that the curriculum should say for example that there is a trade off between police and adult peddlers although we we all know that a good deal of it is true. I think a teacher has to rely on experiences of kids. I mean any kid that grew up in Harlem knows you know I've seen it on the street and a teacher can bring that out. So the realities really are the most important person in this whole thing is the teacher.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:25:16.770
Well what are you doing to reach teachers so that they can become more involved with the more modern approaches to curriculum. There are some teachers I know who are very sensitive talking about ethnic issues. They just don't want to deal with it. They may be white teachers talking about black that maybe like teachers talking about Jews. They are just not able or willing to get into this. Now does your division have anything to do with teacher training helping them to be able to better use these materials in these programs.

Charlotte Frank 00:25:47.460
Yes our division is has that responsibility. We have a center center for staff development who has been charged with that responsibility. But you really have described a very large issue and I don't know that it will be solved this year. I don't know whether it'll be solved next year. There are a variety of. Sensitivity and sensitivity and awareness programs to try and relate the problems of our street that our youngsters are very much involved with with the kinds of activities that I teach is designed for the classroom and that is clearly as as as has been said here a very personal situation. In the responsibility of the students and the parents and the larger community unless they have a share in the development of the curriculum. We really have a one sided development focus and we can really be accused of developing a better framework that has no possibility of relating to what the students feel are important unless we give them a piece of the action and a sense of ownership in what's happening in the classrooms then we are really not preparing them for the very issues of how judges are picked. And one of one of the items that Ellen and I feel strongly about the development of newspaper programs newspaper reading programs in those classrooms because the issues in the newspapers relate to those issues that are directly involved with it with the students and the parents very real world. There is a program that's being funded now for each district in New York City that will speak to using the television programs those programs that New York City kids look at every night and we use that as the basis for developing reading skills so that it Starsky and Hutch is something that they watch. It might be that there will be that script that will help the teacher develop those kinds of thought probing questions that would help our youngsters start to relate to what's right and what's wrong and what is good and what is bad because we're really now talking about a moral and ethical value educational program which is really one of. The large issues for I don't know if just New York City schools I think just for society in general.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:28:22.460
Ellen the last time you hear you talk about the bicentennial and you're working with school systems and schools about that in New York City as 100 closer program. Could you briefly tell us to what extent do you think any of the momentum from the bicentennial explorations has continued.

Ellen Dempsey 00:28:38.220
Well the scholars program is just one. And there were so many books that that program started a momentum in terms of new york university and other colleges wanting to develop this kind of thinking in advance scholarly kind of program and we're talking with NYU at the moment and for a development of this because the students in school were so excited.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:29:00.690
Very briefly what opportunities are there right now for parents to get into curriculum planning. They can get into curriculum planning on the district level on the school level. You speak to the principals you speak to your superintendent you speak to the various executive directors who speak to those people who are who have that responsibility and say I I am interested in these kinds of programs. Can I have some opportunity to speak.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior 00:29:26.780
I think that's a good point of wish to close our guest on tonight. So the reason has have an Alan Dempsey and Charlotte Frank the division of curriculum planning and policy of the New York City Board of Education this is Roscoe Brown saying so long for solid reason this program was produced by the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University in association with NBC.

