Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.560
Black films have shown Black people in many "Soul of Reason" roles-- crusader, hero, sex symbol, revolutionary, comic. What does it all mean? Hear Cliff Frazier of Third World Cinema discuss trends in Black filmmaking on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:38.690
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:05.570
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Cliff Frazier who is Administrator of Third World Cinema which is a Black filmmaking organization and media organization which is doing great things in the world of film and media. Glad to have you with us tonight, Cliff.

Cliff Frazier 00:01:18.921
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:20.301
Well we're talking about Black films and, as we indicated at the top of the show, Black films have shown Black people in many, many different roles. We've had comic films, we've had mystery films, we've had "Dracula" and "Frankenstein" films and we've had "Shaft" and "Superman" and "Superfly." And as I said, we want to know what does it all mean. And I know that Third World Cinema is trying to do some significant things in this area. And after we analyze what it means, we'll talk about some of the things that you're doing.

Cliff Frazier 00:01:54.260
OK. You know one of the things that's that's rather interesting in looking at Variety magazine, which is one of the bibles of the of the motion picture, theater, and allied media industries, we see and have seen over the past two months that "Let's Do It Again," a comedy and "Mahogany". ..

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:19.053
An escape film-- a Black Loretta Young film, I call it.

Cliff Frazier 00:02:23.301
Whatever you call it, have been leading the charts in cash receipts for a long, long period of time. So it sort of indicates that the that there's a healthy willing to spend Black audience desirous of seeing images that reflect, to some extent, Black images. In some instances, those reflections are not as positive as they might be. They're not as informational as they might be. They're not as motivational as they might be. But nevertheless they're there.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:57.290
Well don't you think that "Mahogany" has appealed to the white audience as much as it has to the Black audience or is "Mahogany" mainly seen by Black people? As I've seen people line up, I think I've seen a more integrated audience there than I have at "Let's Do It Again."

Cliff Frazier 00:03:13.251
Yeah. Well, Diana Ross was popular with Black buyers of her records as well as the white buyers, as well. To an extent, to some extent an effort has been made to make Billy Dee Williams the quote "Black Clark Gable." And if you'll notice, we use associations and images that that, again, tend to suggest that white folks imitating Black folks.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:41.000
Black folks imitating white folks.

Cliff Frazier 00:03:41.006
I mean, Black folks imitating white folks. Diana Ross is compared with Doris Day, you know, Loretta Young. Billy Dee Williams is compared with Clark Gable. And I think those comparisons suggest that this type of film and this theme of a film should be acceptable to a white audience. On the other hand, I haven't heard those comparisons with "Let's Do It Again." There are other films though, rather escapist, exaggerations of reality, pseudo imitations of ridiculous things like "Friday Foster"-- to some extent the "Shaft" experience bit off a bit of that. There was a willing Black audience prepared to buy the tickets to go see it. And of course, one of the reasons is that when you have very little to choose from, you will choose to spend to see that which you are somewhat able to identify with, regardless to how ridiculous and exaggerated the theme might be.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:46.670
And then of course there is the other thing and that is that as Black folks we expect a lot from the arts. We expect a lot from our theater, from our dance, from our music, and now from our films. And yet the history of filmmaking, in America at least, is that films basically have been escapist oriented. They have not really been message oriented. They they present a covert message in terms of the images that people play, the roles that we play, the way they show life. But in terms of the core content of most American films, they really don't say much in a very deep sense about society. So that when we as Black people demand that our films give messages, we are really swimming up tide against what the media, the film business has been telling us. Probably the most significant thing is that we are asking for--rather than messages-- images, and in a sense we have gotten away from Stepin Fetchit and Rochester. We are no longer just a butler, or the shuffling Sam. We do become a hero. We do become a villain. We do become a detective. And in a sense that is positive, and I think that's what Black people were looking for in part. Myself, I'm interested in messages. I'm interested in looking at the society. I'm interested in not necessarily the whole society, but slices of the society. That's why I guess I find films like you sound because that's one probably everyone should recognize. It has not so much a message, but it gives a more detailed slice of society. I think Gordon Parks new film "Leadbelly" will do the same thing. It looks intensely at a particular slice of Black life rather than the panoply of cops and robbers and sex symbols running up and down and crashing cars into the wall.

Cliff Frazier 00:06:43.350
Yeah. One problem that the filmmaker confronts, though, is that hundreds of thousands of dollars are usually spent to make a film. Sometimes. ..

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:52.083
That's a good point. You ought to reiterate that.

Cliff Frazier 00:06:54.160
Yes a big chunk of money is spent. Many. .. the average black film costs probably eight hundred thousand to a million dollars. The rule of thumb is that in order to make a profit you have to make at least two and a half times what you've paid to make the film. That also is a big chunk of money. And once you realize the. .. your nut, which is at two and a half, then you begin to to walk in the gravy. But all of us want to walk in the gravy. Now the Black filmmakers who are emerging and who wish to participate more meaningfully in the industry have great difficulty getting this kind of money.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:37.860
You have difficulty getting the upfront money the eight hundred thousand and a million, and I imagine even if you are able to put a package together you have difficulty retaining enough control.

Cliff Frazier 00:07:49.750
I mean the complexity of the film industry is much greater than what might appear. First of all, you got to find the money. Once you find the money, you got to make the film. Once you've made the film, you've got to put it in the marketplace for some kind of public consumption. Now at all of these turns there's a possibility of you being discouraged, turned around, and even defeated. Raising the money is a big problem. Usually even with the Black films and the Black themes, it's the whites who can go out and raise the money because they have greater access to the lenders in the marketplace.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:25.801
That's right because basically it's not a hundred dollar lenders.

Cliff Frazier 00:08:28.381
That's what we're talking about. They want some security, or they give the impression that they want some security. And let's keep in mind also that efforts are usually made to discourage Black participation in a money-making situation, be it films, be it television, be it the record industry, be it whatever it is. Whites choose to maintain as much control of these industries as they possibly can and they will put, they will put pitfalls and roadblocks in your path at every turn.--every time they can.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:01.080
And part of that, of course, is that much of the money that has gone into this comes from the moneyed establishments.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:08.730
Oh yeah and people who have discretionary money to spend and particularly when you know let's say a white banker's dealing with another broker or what have you. They've done business before they have a certain amount of built up confidence. Then when a black comes into the scene regardless of his credentials there is a certain amount of hesitancy which in part is natural and is part racism is to say well look can we really trust this person can we usually an excuse. That of course it's no use.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:38.220
But what I was developing is that the the climate within which this takes place is a climate of risk. I think we should all know the film business as a high risk business. I mean not every film.

Speaker 9 00:09:50.460
Most film makes the rewards though can be very very great Claudine which was third world cinema's first film enjoyed immense financial and critical success and it's put third world in a position to be able to deal in the marketplace to be able to get some measure of financial credibility and dignified responses from those moneylenders. So we hope that in months to come third world will begin to accelerate its processes more quickly and put in motion two or three films almost simultaneously.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:29.910
What could you tell us a little about third world. How was it organized.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:34.980
What's its basic constituency and what is its basic shade third world is a minority controlled film production company I should say a media production company because third world is not going to limit itself to motion picture production in in future months it will be involved in television productions. It will move and even to some extent into the advertising industry to begin to develop commercials to hopefully play some kind of significant role in influencing the stories. The images you see the control of those stories that are being told to also represent an area of employment for emerging black professionals black and Hispanic Professional.

Speaker 10 00:11:20.840
If I recall correctly at one time third world was doing some training.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:24.050
It still is worth a shot as in fact in ministry I administer that training program and third world has moved even into the unions.

Speaker 11 00:11:34.910
Approximately 75 people in various skills but it doesn't just confine itself to motion picture production.

Speaker 9 00:11:43.520
It's also interested in quite a number of other areas and said before we're concerned with television making sure that a number of people function meaningfully in the television industry in fact one of one of our earlier graduates we were able to place at NBC TV maybe show that the audience was not particularly familiar with us can become aware of it. There's a whole range a myriad of behind the scenes jobs hidden in television and in filmmaking generally. You see the actor you see the announcer and that's what most people identify.

Speaker 10 00:12:16.850
Yeah. We made it my way to do so but behind it it's it's the lighting and it's the audio person and it's the absolutely sound coordinator and the mixer and the stagehand and a production assistant a production supervisor an electrician and you name it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:32.550
But I must be at least 20 unions that are involved in just producing one.

Speaker 9 00:12:37.370
Why.

Speaker 12 00:12:37.660
There are quite a number of unions and they have within those unions various locals that controls certain disciplines within the broadcasting industry.

Speaker 9 00:12:45.950
And how does one get in those with difficulty. You have to be either in someone's family a station must be under pressure for a license renewal and prepared to respond more favorably to a minority effort to get in. One thing that really dismayed me a great deal I was doing a show in California TV show and there were a lot of us who were on the camera personality were doing. Ah no. And I looked around and all the technicians were white. Now I knew this show had a limited run and eventually those blacks would no longer be working in front of the camera. However those technicians who were making as much or more than the personalities on their jobs would continue. And because of that I began to think that it would become very important for me to make an effort to try to bring more minorities in that behind the scenes area so that not only we could find meaningful employment but to build a stronger economic base for black people because that's really what third world cinema is about as you say in addition to being a production organization in many areas of media is also a training organization.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:56.120
And if anything that black film The new genera of black films will do. Hopefully it will be through the leadership of folks like third well to help us develop meaningful and realistic images of black people. Now in doing this clip through your training program what kind of jobs do you train people for. How do people get in touch with this and how many people may be trained over the past few years.

Speaker 12 00:14:24.310
OK. We take the position that it's vitally important to have a minority inclusion into a wide variety of areas that relate to the mass media not just motion picture production. There are only X number of jobs in the motion picture industry. We try to relate to broadcasting public relations sales distribution advertising anything that relates to communicating a message be it visually viewed through sound be it through the printed word etc.. Third World Cinema is located at 62 West forty fifth telephone number is 9 7 2 9 300. Over the past I would think three two and a half to three years we've been responsible for moving approximately 300 people into these allied media industries some as producers some as production managers some as camera operators sound recordist public relations specialists et cetera. And we feel that it's in these areas that we can not only make some kind of significant impact as far as affecting and influencing the spoken or communicated word but also it could represent significant and continuing employment for those participants rather than having people work for a week and then be unemployed.

Speaker 3 00:15:49.020
All right now what specifically if let's say a person in the audience wants to be trained in some area of media and they call your number 9 7 2 9 300 and say well look I want to come in and register one of these training programs. Now what specific training programs do you have. How are they funded. How much do they cost and so on.

Speaker 12 00:16:12.460
Okay. The persons would call us at the number that was given. And they would be asked to come in to discuss what their real interests are. So a lot of people are wrapped up with what is considered the glamour of the industry.

Speaker 9 00:16:26.820
So we try to break that down on our personality or I think even behind the scenes is glamorous when a lot of it is a hard lot of hard times dirty work. So we try to wipe away the glamour of it and bring it down to its nuts and bolts. You'd be surprised how many people get discount cuts.

Speaker 9 00:16:46.720
That's not so the intent is to treat it realistically.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:52.350
And once we've conveyed that we have them fill out the applications we have and tried we tried to determine what is this specific area of interest if in the future we have an opening that relates to that. And we've we've delved into public relations we've delved into advertising motion picture projectionists camera etc. If we have an opening in the future that relate to their inches even graphic arts they will be notified to come in to be interviewed for that specific one.

Speaker 11 00:17:31.170
We will then make a determination from those persons interviewed which ones we think will best be able to function in that given discipline. And then we'll put the person in for a six month period of training usually six months to a year. Now how is it funded. Is this something that people have to pay for. No one.

Speaker 11 00:17:51.840
This is free federal agencies or state agencies or what it's funded at present by the New York City. And we hope to move it over to the federal government sometime in the in the coming months which has at this time more financial stability. We have enjoyed tremendous success. I think we might be considered one of the favorite programs because of this high record of accomplishment not only has third world been interested in moving people into the industry through training but we also try to identify people who already have skills who are professionals and out of work and if we hear of a job that relate to their skills we'll call them as a young man. Most recent as in a letter out for four producers position here at T.C. and I think that he very well might get that he's a highly qualified very capable individual. We're concerned about our folks working those who don't have skills how can they get skills those that do have skills how can they get a job after being laid off fired etc. and move them into some kind of meaningful position see one of the things that I recently finished pilot for a series for one of the other stations and if this goes as a series they'll be approximately 16 17 shows you will hire approximately 20 30 or 40 people for each show.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:20.070
If you take the lowest figure 20 and multiply that by 17 that gives you some idea as to the number of jobs that any producer of a series controls. Now would you clarify for the audience what a producer is is differentiated from a director from a writer.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:39.610
OK. The producer is the one who puts all the component parts together that result in the finished product. He's the one or she's the one who's responsible for identifying the writer or if it's an already written piece of material getting the money and assembling the people necessary to to make the film a reality. He hires the actors he has the director here as its production manager with the production manager and the director's assistance they hire the crew they hire the cast the producer is the one who controls the entire thing. That person is the one who's responsible for moving people into positions of employment through the years. The producers have been white most of the black films have had white producers. Now if if sincerity had been involved on the part of most of those producers to move black people into key positions within these various industries and into those unions no blacks could have done it because that producer controls the number of jobs.

Speaker 13 00:20:45.390
If you tell a union I want to use that particular cameraman how can they prevent you from hiring that for things like well he isn't a union member well may make him one member. How can they prevent this man from working because this man has the skill that you need to produce the film you want. That's how whites have got in through the years that's how about the father and son thing is continue to exist in most cases you'll find a producer when he produces a film as she this the film they will have some member of their family connected with that film. With that film as well because that person is in a position to control the job flow. Now you can't just be grandiose and and be idealistic and bring in someone who can do the job. You got to have people who can function with a lot of black and Puerto Rican folks out here who have skills who should be moved either into the key positions or into positions that are a little below the key positions so they can acquire the necessary skills to move up that other rung because realistically man if if white producers are making white films they will not likely call on black folks to work.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:54.330
So with all of these black films being made it is crucially important that future producers be they black or white give serious attention to bringing black and Puerto Rican folks into meaningful positions. The film we shot for the other station was shot in Harlem. I had one hundred percent minority crew actors. We even went to the the various eating establishments uptown went to one of the bars and said look the city was operating the kitchens. Can you cook enough food for 30 people. One two three and four time went to one of the Muslim Raza Muslim residents and arranged to have the cast fair the cast and crew fare. Three or four times we recycled whatever moneys were available for this production.

Speaker 13 00:22:42.870
Within that community we used blacks who had equipment and ran their equipment rather than going to the equipment rental houses just again to not only give them the money and enable them to continue to function as professionals but to encourage that's that concept of recycling the moneys within your community so you build a stronger base within that community. It relates to some extent with the philosophy that the nation of Islam had years ago when they were buying from the Islamic bakeries buying from the Islam supermarkets and recycling the money so the moneys you make outside in that wide environment be it working for the bank be it working for the clothing store et cetera et cetera. You take some of that money and you bring it back into your communities what you have done through the years you bring it back to your community and you spend that money with that black merchant. You spend that money with that that the person owns that black eating established so that they get economically stronger they are able to hire more people and the process of recycling that money with n builds a stronger community so that you in turn can wind up by depositing your money perhaps locally. And if it isn't a black controlled bank then certainly as a as a black community you can influence what that bank does.

Speaker 14 00:24:04.410
You can use the money that have been put in by blacks to help refurbish to help repair to help build a stronger and more solid community and all of this interrelate the media industry interrelate with that concept. All industries can interrelate.

Speaker 3 00:24:23.160
Now when you get into doing this let's say through third world cinema and see the film you just shot. To what extent does it slow your process down. When you have to go and dig out these people and dig out this equipment and find these people because certainly I think most black people would agree 100 percent with the basic philosophy on the other hand immediate business is a time bound business.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:50.850
You've got to meet deadlines. How do you go about this. Because I know that this is a problem of all of us who in the media face OK.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:59.010
I've had an advantage in that for the past eight years I've been involved in developing talent for the for the media prior to the third well I was doing it with Community Film Workshop counsel at that time we must have found and trained approximately a thousand people for jobs around the country as broadcast journalists as as on the air reporters as cameramen light et cetera et cetera et cetera. We established film based workshops around the country again using that center as a nucleus through which to train people for various skills in the industry. We're talking what eight years ago. If some of those folks have been working intermittently for that past eight years. They are gaining skills. I know enough people do not have to search for any great length unfortunately.

Speaker 3 00:25:49.560
Well have enough colorful phrases and I read a statistic the other day based on a study done by the National Council of Churches that the number of blacks in the media actually decreasing. Which does raise a sort of a problem. It's true that some people retire and get sick and die or whatever. But basically we training more people yet the opportunities are tightening up. What can we do about that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:11.820
Well we must continue to press forward we must continue to interrelate with groups like Black citizens for fear media that's constantly making an effort to open up a number of jobs for minorities. See one of the things that has happened they've lumped women together with minorities and say look here's our statistic here our figures and we have a black when you count it twice you know as you as the various broadcasting companies make their reports to the Federal Communications Commission so you have all of these problems.

Speaker 14 00:26:40.440
But in spite of all of that those people who are determined enough those people who lay in there enough who stay with it enough who are persistent who continue and continue and continue in many instances those people eventually reach paydirt. But we are discouraged so quickly and that is often what results in not penetrating that barrier.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:04.770
And hey man as long as I'm out here as long as I'm doing anything that's media related you can rest assured that a lot of the people working with it are gonna be my brothers and sisters of course one of the purposes of shows like sole reason is to help the world at large.

Speaker 3 00:27:21.130
BLACKWELL All right well to know about what opportunities there are for blacks and develop this desire which all black people have in terms of the desire but to reinforce this idea of coming back and keep on trying and getting those skills. I think the key point that you've developed throughout our interview tonight has been the idea that you need to have those skills and even now there might be some barriers that are holding you back. And you've got to really keep on moving ahead. And I think said well Zimmer tries to do that kind of thing again. Could you give our audience the address and the telephone number in case anyone wants to contact you at 62 West forty fifth and the telephone number is 9 7 2 9 300 and that's third world cinema which is doing a fantastic job in the area of developing black films analyzing themes and developing personnel for the film industry and the media industry. Our guest on tonight sole reason has been Cliff Frazier administrative from third world cinema and we've been talking about the developments in black films and the role of blacks in the media industry.

