Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:00:01.610
Black theater is the most exciting part of American theater today. Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson has developed an interesting collection of the history of Black American theater. Hear Dr. Johnson discuss the Afro-American Theater Museum on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:36.661
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:01:03.120
Our guest on tonight's"Soul of Reason" is Dr. Helen Armstead -Johnson, who is director of the Afro-American Theater Museum and is also professor of English at York College of the City University. Glad to have you with us tonight, Helen.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:01:14.941
And, thank you for asking me.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:01:17.070
You've done such a fantastic job of pulling together memorabilia, artifacts manuscript, et cetera, about Black theater that it is really a pleasure to have you on the program this evening and to give our audience a chance to learn about this fantastic area. This is an area that unfortunately, a lot of people don't know about. Now that we have the weirs and "River Niger," everybody says 'Aww, Black theater's com' alive," but Black theater has always been with us. Black people are going back to the days of Cleopatra, who have made contributions in the arts, and here in America. The Black musical scene,the Black dance scene, and the Black drama have been very important. So to begin with, could you tell our audience what the purpose of the museum is, how it got started and why you think it's important.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:02:07.320
All right, well let me take the last question first. I think it's very important because of its uniqueness. It's the only one of the kind in the country. There are others, other collections and particularly in some libraries that do have some theatrical materials. But this is the only one that has as its primary focus, the development in the theater. Now, the - our purpose is to develop, not only the museum as something to visit, but a research center for scholars. And it is moving in that direction because I've had scholars, writers, producers, students, teachers just about every category of person I can think of coming to me for some kind of assistance. The only trouble is nobody wants to pay for it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:02:55.950
Well, of course that's one of the things we're going to talk about a little later. But I think, in the area of scholarship, it does take someone who has a tremendous amount of interest and ability and, that great drive to bring their particular idea to fruition. Now could you sort of talk about how this idea got started. How did you do this and where is it located and so on.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:03:19.590
Well it's located in the Hotel Chelsea, which is on Twenty-third Street between 7th and 8th and it, although I live there, and have lived there nearly nine years, the museum is not in my apartment. It is in its own apartment which is adjacent to mine and I think that's a very important point.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:03:37.653
And that gives it its own integrity. It's own physical place.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:03:39.750
That's right. That's right. Now, actually, I got started by collecting materials as a scholar to write a book. In '68, I was asked to write a book about Sissle and Blake.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:03:52.770
Now, just for the audience who doesn't know Sissle and Blake and they're so great. We think everybody should know them, maybe you might mention who Noble Sissle, the late Noble Sissle, yes and the presently 93 year-old Eubie Blake are.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:04:07.170
Yes. Well, of course they're so important in the history of this because in 1921, when they, with their partners Miller and Lyles, brought "Shuffle Along" to Broadway. They set off a whole decade, not only of imitation for the ten year period, but a permanent influence. We still see some of this now. Noble Sissle just died the 17th of December. He was the librettist and Blake was the composer.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:04:37.440
And of course everybody - not everyone, but a number of people are hearing the music of Eublie Blake, just like they're hearing the music of Scott Joplin through this new emphasis on ragtime, and Mr. Blake is one of the real treasures of our land. And I think people should know him and as you were saying you've become you were involved in writing this book and this led to the development of material now become basically the museum.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:05:03.300
I think I have bring this in that originally I was an 18th century scholar and I wrote a dissertation on Edmund Burke. And it was because I was able to work with Burke papers and because I did research in the best libraries in Europe and this country, too even before writing the dissertation. And subsequent to writing the dissertation that I learned what to do about the thing that I was most interested in. And as I said about the book the more I got into it as a scholar, I quickly realized that I did not know enough to write that book. And I was not willing to bring out one of the many shoddy books about black culture that were being published in the late 1960s.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:05:45.350
See, that really did pose a dilemma that appeared in the late 60s and early 70s. So little has been written about Blacks in the arts and literature ,and dance, and drama and so on. And that the number of people that threw things together and got them out there are some reputable books in the field but unfortunately, there's just a lot of general material - it really isn't too accurate and too scholarly.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:06:07.551
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:06:08.032
And, it is good to hear that you've done this. And those of us who know, you know the quality of your work. The question that you raised earlier is the need for support for this museum. But before we get to that part you could tell us about some of the things that are in the museum.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:06:26.480
Oh I'd be delighted to do that. Actually, the room that's open now I call or the suite that's open now - I call the Mills-Thompson suite which is named for the late Florence Mills who died in 1927. But at the time, was certainly one of the most successful and certainly popular musical comedy stars on both sides of the ocean.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:06:51.651
As a matter of fact I heard on a radio on one of these little trivia programs that at her funeral there were over one hundred and twenty thousand people lining the route and this was in 1927.

Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson 00:07:01.991
Well, the The day that when the casket was passing along they had an airplane come down and release some blackbirds because she'd been in the blackbird review one of these years. That's right. Yeah that's right. And it's that's part of our history that a lot of us either did not get or only heard about from our parents and didn't find anything in writing to substantiate. Well, I have. I have. I think it's good that we have this. Because the newspapers that I have vary the figure between 200 and 250,000. That's very interesting. That's right. And I have a photograph of the, of these people in front of the, well in the street. You can't even get to the funeral home. And I think it's one of the most phenomenal photographs in the collection.

00:07:03.083
Now that interesting When the casket it was passing along, they had an airplane come down and release some blackbirds because she'd been in the blackbird review. That's right. Yeah that's right. And it's that's part of our history that a lot of us either did not get only heard about from our parents and didn't find anything in writing to substantiate. Well I have I have because the newspapers that I have very the figure between 200 and 250000. That's very interesting. Right. Then I have a photograph of the. Of these people in front of the wall in the street. You can't even get to the funeral home. And I think it's one of those phenomenal photographs in the collection. that when the cast it was passing along to have an airplane come down and release some blackbirds because she'd been in the blackbird. That's right. Yeah that's right. And it's that's part of our history that a lot of us either did not get only heard about from our parents and didn't find anything in writing to substantiate. Well I have I have because the newspapers that I have very the figure between 200 and 250000. That's very interesting. Right. Then I have a photograph of the. Of these people in front of the wall in the street. You can't even get to the funeral home. And I think it's one of the most phenomenal photographs in the collection. that when the cast it was passing along to have an airplane come down and release some blackbirds because she'd been in the blackbird. That's right. Yeah that's right. And it's that's part of our history that a lot of us either did not get only heard about from our parents and didn't find anything in writing to substantiate. Well I have I have because the newspapers that I have very the figure between 200 and 250000. That's very interesting. Right. Then I have a photograph of the. Of these people in front of the wall in the street. You can't even get to the funeral home. And I think it's one of those phenomenal photographs in the collection. that when the cast it was passing along to have an airplane come down and release some blackbirds because she'd been in the blackbird. That's right. Yeah that's right. And it's that's part of our history that a lot of us either did not get only heard about from our parents and didn't find anything in writing to substantiate. Well I have I have because the newspapers that I have very the figure between 200 and 250000. That's very interesting. Right. Then I have a photograph of the. Of these people in front of the wall in the street. You can't even get to the funeral home. And I think it's one of those phenomenal photographs in the collection. that when the cast it was passing along to have an airplane come down and release some blackbirds because she'd been in the blackbird. That's right. Yeah that's right. And it's that's part of our history that a lot of us either did not get only heard about from our parents and didn't find anything in writing to substantiate. Well I have I have because the newspapers that I have very the figure between 200 and 250000. That's very interesting. Right. Then I have a photograph of the. Of these people in front of the wall in the street. You can't even get to the funeral home. And I think it's one of those phenomenal photographs in the collection. that when the cast it was passing along to have an airplane come down and release some blackbirds because she'd been in the blackbird. That's right. Yeah that's right. And it's that's part of our history that a lot of us either did not get only heard about from our parents and didn't find anything in writing to substantiate. Well I have I have because the newspapers that I have very the figure between 200 and 250000. That's very interesting. Right. Then I have a photograph of the. Of these people in front of the wall in the street. You can't even get to the funeral home. And I think it's one of those phenomenal photographs in the collection. Now's that interesting and lets take a little diversion on that. When Bill Robinson, Bill "Bojangles" Robinson died, Ed Sullivan, who really like Bill Robinson, arranged for the public schools to be let out and they had several hundred thousand people line the way. A number of people said well "Bill Robins was a fine man" but we didn't really need the white community to do this for us. We should have been able to do this ourselves. Now going back, that was around '47 or '48, maybe '53. Now going back to 1927 to see this outpouring, that tends to suggest to me that there was really - and I know it just from history - a cultural thrust in Harlem. If I recall correctly, the Harlem Renaissance was in that particular decade. And Black people had been doing things as they had done before but there was more response. Do you think that the outpouring of support for Florence Mills was a function of Black people recognizing her real strength and contributions or was it something like the Bill Robinson situation that was somewhat manipulated by the press? No, that was not manipulated. People refer to Florence, Negro people referred to Florence as "our little Florence". There was just great affection, for her along with respect for her talent. And one of the things I think that helped to bring this about is that although she was the top star literally in the world at that time she never acted that way. And I know that one of the chorus girls, former chorus girls, told me that they would be downstairs in the dressing rooms there playing cards. And Florence would come, sit and play cards with them. Now the person who replaced Florence in "Shuffle Along," for example, was not that way. And oh, she had all of her starry airs about her. And as a result, they just ganged up on her. And one night, just left her in tears. Because, you see, if the chorus girls didn't work with the star, the star really couldn't make. And I think, that it was Florence's own personality, her lack of ostentation her real identity - identification rather - with her people, that really provided the thrust as you just called it. And that kind of resulted in that kind of outpouring.The kind of thing you're describing now is the depth of scholarship that really makes a museum, makes a scholar. And many of the things that you have in the museum really make it possible for those people who want to study about the Black American theater to get that type of depth. What are some of the other things that are included in the museum? Well actually, I have at the moment, three of what I call the "Incipient Periods" or three stages of development: minstrelsy, the operetta of 1890s and the musical comedy period of the 1920s. Now a lot of people have trouble with the identification of the Harlem Renaissance as a renaissance but they have looked in the wrong places for the prototypes. They've looked for fiction and poetry in the earlier periods. But there was a reawakening in the theater. In the late 1890s. We had three giant troupes: Bert Williams and George Walker with one; Colin Johnson with another, and Ernest Hogan with his. But by 19 - and there was a furious activity in the theater by 1911. Each team had broken up because Cole was dead, Walker was dead and Ernest Hargon was dead. And there was a kind of hiatus then that lasted for another ten years. But when Miller and Lyles and Sissle and Blake, as I said, were able to bring "Shuffle Along" there again was this reawakening in the theater and everybody who had lived through the previous periods and who had been in the theater had this sense of reawakening so that. Well, what I was about to ask, with all of this information all of the excitement, how does the public get a chance to use the museum? And also, what kind of support can the public provide so the museum will grow? Well actually, the parent of the museum is a tax exempt foundation. And anybody who makes a contribution to it can take advantage of that with his tax returns which is all right. But how might this contribtion be made and to what address should it should be sent? To the Helen Armstead-Johnson Museum, to make it short, Hotel Chelsea 222 West 23rd Street and theZIP code there is 10011 That's in New York City. Yes aha. And for those who want to enter the museum and use it, how might they get in touch with you? By calling the Hotel Chelsea, but it's extremely difficult now because I must work not only to support myself, but to support the museum. The number at the Hotel Chelsea is Chelsea 3 - CH3 3700 and they can ask for Dr. Helen Armstead-Johnson or leave a message for her in order to make an aopointment. They don't even have to call that long name. Just call and ask for Dr. Johnson and they will be put through if I'm there. But the point is leave the message. But I want to get back to your your question which I did not finish and that was that there are these three periods and in the minstral period for example I have a very rare photograph of a poster from an ex-slave troupe that went to England in 1866. So that we have something extremely important from all three of these periods. After that, we were not particularly original, but those were the three points in which we did most to influence the development of the American stage. And I think it's important for the audience to realize that there is so much available to study about Black theater, that people can write any number of books and do any number of project. Oh, there's so much! But but one just has to be serious about it and willing to do some very, very hard work. And the trouble I have with the books now,i s that most of them just have so many inaccuracies and people not knowing the history don't know that these are inaccuracies when they pick them up. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason "is Dr. Helen Armstead- Johnson, who is director of the Afro-American Theater Museum and we are talking about the materials that are in this fantastic museum about Black theater and the epical periods in black theater. And as we were saying earlier, Helen, you have divided the emphasis into these three major epics. One thing I wanted to ask, because all of us who are Black, have great pride in the legendary Ira Aldridge who interpreted Shakespeare and obviously Shakespeare is not Black, although some of his work, Othello for example, dealt with Black people. Do you have anything in the way of memorabilia or tips that relate to IRA Aldrich and some of the so-called classical actors because so much of black theater has been musical and interpretive which comes from our culture and also comes of the fact that most of American theater has been musical and interpretive. If we have any weakness in American theater I would say that it is our so-called serious and I don't like to use that word. I think musicals nowadays. But comes from plays that do not have much music in them. And I know Aldrich was the premiere Shakespearean actor of his time maybe you could tell us something about that and then tell it to continue and discuss some of the things that in you. All right I want to mention Ira Aldrich is to really take us back to 18 21 and that is that the that is to rather the African Growth Theater which was at the corner of Mercer and Bleecker streets here in the village and I might add. That's right around the corner from New York into various categories in which corner it is. Well you know there was a building right there that Jews call the Grove Press building the building itself is one of the classic architectural buildings of the city. And when you discovered this I read about this and reading about the museum I was wondering exactly where it was because in 1821 the village was the suburbs. Yes. Yes that that's where the heart of the black community lived at that time actually. Yes. Little Street in Mercer Street right. Right around there. But you see James Hulett was already a Shakespearean actor. He was the mature Shakespearean actor with that African growth company. When Ira Aldrich was a young when learning from him and after about 1924 I think it was when I was 24 1823 when Aldrich went to Europe. HULETT then went around the country given what he called lectures readings rather on Shakespeare's proud heroes. And at that time I have a playbill from that period which shows that another actor who who had retired came out of retirement to work with that theater. They did Richard the Third and they did a fellow as well as their own original things. Now I'm saying that to say that although the earliest theater that I have any record for right now is that African growth theater there must certainly have been an earlier one. If a man came out of retirement. Now of course then Aldrich went to Europe. Now you ask me about his memorabilia when he died. He had two small children at one that was much too young to have ever known him. But she is the one whose name was Ira Aldrich also but who became a composer and published under the name of Montague ring. Well she became very very friendly with Mr. and Mrs. Browning and Browning was the tenor and leader of a group that had originally gone to England out of shelf along called the four harmony kings. And I have a postcard autographed by Ira Aldrich the daughter using that name. And it says to Mr. Mrs. Browning in 1927. Then I also have another note with one of the sisters apologizing that she had to leave early before Mr. Browning finished singing. I have a print of that came from an English document and very recently I met another scholar who has two Ira Aldrich letters which he has promised to let me exhibit. And it's interesting as you talk about these things I can almost see these people coming to life. I can really see the times that they come to and this is what a scholar should do. And it does bring a certain amount of excitement every day. How how have the students and others who have visited the museum and studied there responded. Do they get this kind of feeling or is there still a sort of a sense of awe that this really happened because as black people so much of our history just has not been recorded and we don't know one and we find out that a black person do this. Yes. Yeah. And then all of a sudden you in a sense of all you know I do a lot of writing in this area and I must admit I'm finding myself in awe every day. How do students respond to the opportunity to study in the museum. Well at first it's overwhelming because they're surrounded by so much all of which is is new for them. Actually I try to limit the use to people who really have very serious interest because I have to be very selective about my time as a result. For instance I will have somebody coming in who's working on a book on the Cotton Club or somebody who's working on black opera. You see we have there's so many peripheral areas because the museum actually includes the interests of the people and their families who were in the theater. And that leads us into a number of directions. So sometimes I'm a little surprised by the things people ask for and even more surprised to find that I have things in that area. Well let's go back again to the question of support. You have a foundation and the public can contribute to the foundation and tax exempt et cetera but it would appear to me that a museum like this should be supported by something like the National Endowment for the Humanities. Well I found some in New York State Council of the arts and I think that maybe that's something that out of our discussion some of us in the audience might want to deal with. Well I found I learned this and I certainly would be the first one to say that I had so much to learn in developing this I've never been a fund raiser and I just spent a couple years doing the wrong things. As soon as I set up the foundation that the lawyers said my lawyer suggestion I had stationery made but that didn't have anything on it but my name because it was no boy I'd use it so that when I applied for money I was turned down everywhere because there was no board. I'm happy to say now I have what I consider a most impressive board. It includes such people as Walter Kerr John Houseman Brock Peters common to love a lot. Geoffrey Holder Max McGrath. And I'm hoping that their names are going to change the picture for me. I'm in the process now of trying to get out. Letters to the foundations and I'm so poor that what I had to do was type these names down the side of the original stationery and have it run off and offset written to see because I really couldn't afford to have the new stationery made at this point. Interesting that this is the way a number of great ideas and organizations get started. We have a number of people coming on the show and I talk about how they start that particular area and it usually starts with about two things. One is a very exciting idea and the other is a very dedicated person. And in your instance the two bridge together and as we were saying at the top of the show black theater is probably most exciting thing in American theater today. Maybe it has always been that but particularly now. Not only do we have the musicals but we have some of these very very fine dramas like The River Niger. And then of course going back almost a generation ago now didn't seem like that a raisin in the sun. And looking at plays of this type what has been the reaction of some of the younger playwrights and younger people in theater to the museum. Have they contributed or are they as interested as some of the older people who have been working with you. Well what I've actually found unfortunately is something that I touched upon at the very beginning of the program. I could be overwhelmed by such young people who want to come in and look and copy costumes and go through the papers and what have you but nobody wants to pay a dime. And it's been very difficult for me to get them to understand that it costs money to have the materials therefore that my time is money because it's not the kind of place where somebody can come in on his own. If you spend an hour with them you get an hour of my information and my attention as well as the opportunity to see or to use some materials. And so I realize that they don't have much money but I've had mature people come in and actually spend two and two and a half hours and I have this little silver dish which which I mentioned mentioned in the New York Times article last summer for donations but they'd spent two and a half hours and rave about the place and then leave me a dollar. And of course I'm a part of that. I think to be really fair about it is the fact that in the black community in a minority community we haven't developed the type of tradition of supporting our institute. That's right. That's right. And then of course to be fair about headed by people have less money collectively than white people although as you will say that everyone has money to do what they want to do and want to get it. There's another possibility. I was thinking about as you were talking you work at a university albeit a university that has a lot of financial pressures. Is this not a type of activity that possibly a university might want to become involved with or is it something that is just so personal and so dear to you that you feel that it's better done under your very close supervision and guidance and surveillance. Because undoubtedly you have guided it very carefully. Yes. And that is what has made it as good as it is yes. So what do you think about that. Because I know that every time a treasure comes into the black community a literary treasure an artistic treasure someone wants take it out. And whereas maybe the hotel Chelsea is in the black community physically it is holding the orchestra black here to really it is a place that you have developed and is a place that has some variety and physical and There are two things that I would like to say about that. First of all the, Hotel Chelsea gives anybody - Black or white - coming there to see my museum, a multiple experience. The building itself is a landmark building. It is now up for national landmark recognition or status and then of course the lobby is filled with the art and sculpture. I mean the paintings and sculpture of famous people who have lived there. Many artists have lived there and people have lived for decades. So, so that there is a multiple experience. That's the first place. First thing. The second thing is I think even more important and that is that what I am doing is not limited to just the Black community because we provided the first authentic American theater form in this country, which was minstrelsy. And although the whites bastardized the form, we created something that is still with us in various forms and the some people may have read an article that I published on Blacks in Black. And what we did as minstrels, varied in many, many ways from what the whites presented us as doing. You see. So that I think that there is I can't overstress the importance of our influence. And even during the 1890s where do you think the whites learned to do the cakewalk, which came out of slavery? And the Joffrey Ballet was still doing it a couple of years ago. And then, in the 1920s, during that musical comedy period, people were coming- producers and performers -sitting in the front rows night after night! And our own people would then see their acts being done by these whites who hadn't even paid for it. And of course that gets into the point at many times if you talk about Black theater and Black films and so on. It has to do with control but basically Blacks have not had the financial and, in many instances, the artistic control of their own work. And quite possibly, the existence of a museum it helps to all of us to recognize this long heritage that Blacks have in the theater will catalyze some Blacks who have money, energy, time, etc. To raise the money to make the museum a larger place, to invest in plays, to do the things that enables a group of people to have some control of their own artistic destiny. Right now, I am trying to get organized social groups who normally give benefits to help various help various tax exempt organizations to become interested in what I'm doing. There is no way for me to develop and work with a 'friends of the museum' at this point. As I said, I am teaching four days a week this semester. And so I really am soliciting the support of major social groups who do organize for just or are organized, rather, for such purposes. And those in the audience who are interested in this support should contact the Helen Armstead-Johnson Foundation at the Hotel Chelsea. The address I believe is 222 yes West twenty-third Street. New York, New York and also if anyone wants to make an appointment to work in the museum. They should contact Dr. Johnson at CH3 3 700. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Dr. Helen Armstead- Johnson, who is director of the Afro-American Theater Museum and we've been talking about the history of Blacks in theater and the activities of this fantastic museum in preserving some of the memorabilia and notes from Black history and Black theater. Thanks again for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" Dr. Johnson. Thank you so much for having me.

