Roscoe C. Brown 00:00:02.060
Watergate. Black mayors in Atlanta, Los Angeles, Gary, Newark. Hear what's happening in the black political scene with Basil Paterson on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Announcer 00:00:33.711
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:01:01.530
With us tonight is Basil Patterson who is vice chairman of the Democratic National Committee and is as knowledgeable as anybody in this whole country about the black political scene and having given you that mouthful of accolades, let's go right to Watergate. What do you think the real meaning and impact of Watergate is on blacks in 1974 USA?

Basil Paterson 00:01:28.110
Well I don't know what the meaning is. I know the meaning can be. I think that black people for many, many years in this country were aware of the hypocrisy and the charade as I call it inherent in what was traditional politics. I don't think anybody had to tell black people that there were a lot of strange things going on. I know I toured the country in 1972 during the presidential campaign and already we had had the revelation of Watergate, after all that break-in had occurred in July. There had been talk about the money exchanging hands. Black people always understood when money changes hands in cash, that it has a meaning. They've been familiar with that scenario. But I think what black people have to be extremely careful about is something that many of us have been involved in trying to knock down for years, and that would be the mysticism that has grown up about politics. I'm sure you experienced it, I experienced it, as we were coming along wherever we grew up we were told you know "that's politics"...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:02:28.682
"Stay out of politics..."

Basil Paterson 00:02:31.471
and stay out. Always stay out. I remember when I must been 21, 22, I didn't even know what a district leader was. But somebody got me into running for district leader I had a lot of friends and we ran the streets pretty freely. And got on the ballot. My name was on the ballot because I wasn't running anymore by the time my name was on the ballot and yet people'd come to me and say, "hey, Basil, you better get out of that. They gonna do something to you," and I'd say "Who is the they and what are they going to do?" Nobody had the answer to that, but they felt that you did not defy the structured regular organization. Well that's the kind of thing that's kept black people out of politics. And I'm hoping that with the Watergate syndrome, namely "tune off and turn out and get away from it," that black people don't adopt that attitude, because the surest thing that we can find is that those who were continuing this game will continue it further and with less encumbrances if they frighten people out, if they turn people off, if people become just so thoroughly turned off about politics, and they stop participating, then it means that vicious cycle closes the gates so well, those who were doing it before have fewer people in their way.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:03:43.530
Of course another view that I've heard is that the country asked for Watergate by being so hellbent for leather to repress the poor and the blacks, and therefore when the campaign and a campaign strategy is built on keeping black people and poor people out of power, taking away the few gains they've made, then the people who perpetuate this and promulgate this say "look I've got an open hand to do anything." They would rather sell our country down than to allow blacks to have some of the freedoms and the access to the fruits of our society. And when you put that together with the other point that you made about the dropout syndrome I would say that Watergate has some very serious implications for blacks. And then we add to that the fact that so many of our major cities are coming under black mayoral leadership for the first time: Atlanta, L.A., Newark, Gary. And...

Basil Paterson 00:04:51.991
Detroit,

Roscoe C. Brown 00:04:53.793
there will be others. Detroit, Cleveland...

Basil Paterson 00:04:53.793
Raleigh not now but before. Quite possibly New York, as we'll talk later. What does this really mean? Does it mean that blacks are getting more sophisticated and are really getting more power, or does it mean that now that the cities are considered to be unmanageable that they're not really a good place to be, that blacks are being put into a caretaker type position. What what do you see in that?

Basil Paterson 00:05:18.660
I think there's somewhat a combination of both. There's no question that there's a great deal more sophistication in politics that black people have no question about it. You should go around this country, you'll find that it's no longer just one person in a given area, there are many people in a given area, men and women, who are outstanding people in the black community, and who are competing on equal terms with anybody in the white political community. Also it is some of this abandonment of the central cities by the whites fleeing to the suburbs, as we've heard it, the feeling that maybe they can do better by staying out of that core city on the part of the majority populations. And if you take a look at most of the cities that you have mentioned they have very large black populations, but of course when you catch a Los Angeles with an 18 percent black population electing a black mayor, you realize that part of it has to do with the sophistication and the competence and the talent of the man. Tom Bradley is a man who was very highly thought of in the Los Angeles area. He was also running as a man and proved himself to be absolutely intellectually incompetent and corrupt so that we now reached that stage that we're talking in terms of what talent does a black man bring to politics and I suggest that it's not black chauvinism first to say that those who've had to survive in the face of a hostile environment have survived because they may be, as Darwin called them, the fittest. So that much of this has to do the talent the blacks bring into government and the abandonment to some extent by the whites.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:06:52.810
And of course you have an other factor which is related this abandonment. And that is that politics probably operates around some critical mass and critical mass when you have 7 percent or 8 percent or even 12 percent blacks is not very critical. But when it gets to be 35 percent and 45 percent and in some instances 62 percent the mass is very critical and as we know in terms of the reapportionment decisions that it's really unconscionable that blacks have been denied this power in the past even in areas where they were in numerical superiority. So there is a certain, you might call it a sort of a sociological inertia that's ha-, that's bringing about some of this. Then you add to that the need for leaders the need for people to come up. But one of the things that sometimes bothers me, and it shouldn't bother me really because you'd expect the same range of behavior among blacks as among whites, is the various strategies and positions that are used in the competitiveness for leadership in the black political community, that somehow or another you would hope that blacks have a higher ethic about the way in which they relate to each other and relate to the political system than whites. And what I think we find in so many instances is that you have the same random distribution of selfishness, of degrees of individual initiative, of ways of relating to the system. Now how do you think this comes across in terms of what the black community is able to see. Is the black community becoming more sophisticated in being able to differentiate in the quality of its leaders. Or are we still at that point where because you're black and because you're running you're going to get elected regardless of the degree of your competence.

Basil Paterson 00:08:43.780
No I don't think the latter is true. I think you're finding, and we have illustrations, I don't think it's necessary to name them, where blacks have been candidates around this country and have not drawn black support because it was felt by the black community that these were not necessarily people who could, who could make strides towards resolving some of the problems that the face of black community. When you talk about the black community you talk about black people this country, we're not talking about any esoteric problems, we're talking about the problem of living, day to day survival. You're talking about right now in an energy crisis how do people get enough heat in their homes, to offset the problems that they always had. You know it was interesting that the particular religious group held a meeting up in Harlem, it was a press conference, just a few weeks ago, and one of the things that they were trying to bring up was that you didn't need an energy crisis to find an energy crisis in Central Harlem.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:09:37.601
Right.

Basil Paterson 00:09:38.021
You had homes that weren't heated no matter how much oil was available. So now that this excuse is now available to landlords, many many people are going to be suffering more than they ever did before. But I would suggest to you that we can find the same problems inherent in personality and character in black people as you find in all other people. But there's another factor that frequently is overlooked: the pressure that's placed upon a black public officeholder is greater than that place upon any other. He is far more subject to surveillance put it...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:10:13.751
... to scrutiny...

Basil Paterson 00:10:14.111
in that... I go further than scrutiny. I say surveillance. First they're gonna investigate him beforehand, and then they're going to watch him afterwards. They are looking for any kind of frailty in his makeup, any kind of thing... that doesn't have to be immoral, unethical, or illegal, but that which when focused upon can be made to appear embarrassing.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:10:34.900
Well that's true...

Basil Paterson 00:10:34.903
So that this may be a good thing. It's a good thing. It's unfair. But you know, John Kennedy said life is unfair, and he was absolutely right. But what it does, it creates the kind of pressure for performance that black public officials must learn to respond to.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:10:50.260
Okay, I'll buy that. Now give some examples of how black public officials might show their commitment to changing things as related to the black community. Let's take... I won't take a particular city... Black mayor comes in, town's falling apart economically, high crime rates, poor housing, poor education. Sometimes I wonder if we aren't damning these people with faint praise when we say "look, you're the first black mayor of such and such city of 62 percent black population" and so on. How do you think a black politician can really be responsive in this?

Basil Paterson 00:11:30.250
Well, some black mayors have almost impossible tasks. I think in terms of Richard Hatch, the mayor of Gary, Indiana. And to realize that the state legislature in Indiana can more affect the lives of the people who live in Gary than the mayor can.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:11:45.930
Yeah, and that's certainly true.

Basil Paterson 00:11:46.210
For instance, when they take away from part of the taxable real estate of the city of Gary, the highest returnable tax rate property, the properties where industries are located within the contours, within the confines of the boundaries of Gary, well that's directly affecting the income that Gary can get and therefore the revenues that they have available to use for the problems. So that I think you're right we're damning these men frequently. Atlanta may be different. Maynard Jackson has gone in there and it's before the city has really tipped. Yes it may be 50/50 in population, but apparently there is an acceptance on the part of even the predominantly, and vast predominantly, white Chamber of Commerce that they want to save their city before it goes to that tipping point, and they recognize that in Maynard Jackson they've got an outstanding young man. I mean he's a scholar as well as a leader in every other way, so that he now says he's getting cooperation. He gets that cooperation, then all the people of Atlanta are going to benefit from the talents that Maynard brings. Take a look across the river in Newark, New Jersey. Ken Gibson came in as mayor right after the man who was going out had been convicted. The man served time in prison, but Addonizio was not just convicted of being corrupt, but he was also convicted of structuring a corrupt system. Gibson had the problem that he had to fill jobs for which there was no comparable salary. Why? The predecessor in those positions, all those predecessors, had made more money with non-taxable income, namely bribes and other shaking down, graft, the whole bit, so that many of these men who were going in... I really worry about the situation that they'll be sufficient sophistication of black community not to condemn a man when overnight he doesn't turn the city in five minutes from the dregs into a utopia. It can't be done, but I think it's a salute to blacks that they're willing to take those chances. And if Gibson doesn't get elected Newark unless a lot of black people went out there, did a lot of hustling and scuffling to get him elected. So it means that blacks are saying "this is where we are. We don't have the same mobility that others in our... in this population have." And we've got to fight to save what we've got at a given time. Newark is going to survive. They may have their fights and pulls and tugs amongst blacks amongst whites there. But there's a commitment to make it survive. But it's gonna need more help than they've got within the territory of Newark itself. They're gonna need help from Trenton, the state capital, and more and more, as John Lindsay used to point out constantly, the cities desperately need help from the federal government, and the government that we have now in power in Washington is not giving that help.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:14:33.550
It is not responsive.

Basil Paterson 00:14:34.540
It's not responsive. Frankly at this particular point a lot of us consider the government be damned impotent. I heard the governor of New Jersey say that not long ago. His problem was going down to Washington and finding out he couldn't meet with the president. The president didn't know what the issue was about the oil crisis, and then we had Governor Shapp go down there, and he was the one who negotiated with the truckers, we had a nationwide strike ... Governor Pennsylvania goes down to negotiate. The president is absent.

00:14:58.930
That's true. We're talking with Basil Paterson, vice chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and we are looking at some of the things that black politicians are facing in 1974. And one thing that I think would be interesting to our listeners, particularly our young black listeners, and that is how does a young person, or even a not so young person, develop the savvy, develop the expertise that is necessary to function in the political system. We've talked about the well nigh onto impossible task that many of our black politicians face yet on the other hand, as I pointed up, we have this critical mass of black people and poor people who are saying "look, it's your time to lead. It's your mantle, it has to be picked up." Now how do we go about developing these bright young political leaders?

Basil Paterson 00:15:49.390
Well I think in the black community we have a different, an almost different problem. We have bright young blacks, and I'm talking about male and female, I think our problem is to steer them more and more towards politics. I'm sure you have the same experience as I have. You go to different kinds of conferences, maybe an educational conference, maybe a conference of social workers, and you find some of the most outstanding people you'd want to locate. We've got to start causing them to think in terms of getting into the political structure and by structure I don't mean that they're part of a regular organization or anything of that sort. I'm talking about making their influence felt. I look at groups like I recently met with some of the members the board of directors of a group that works at the Off-Track Betting Corporation, and they have started up what ordinarily would be called a black employee organization, but they're politically motivated. You take a look at the Guardians Association. These are black policemen, New York City Police Department, they are a very political organization in the finest sense of the term, small "p." The Siberians from the transit cops, Praetorians, the housing cops, the Vulcan Society of the Fire Department, the Federation of Black Civil Service Organizations under the leadership of Bill Johnson, who once was the head of the Guardians Association. These are very political organizations. They know when legislation comes up that they should be contacting black legislators and white legislators to get a response so that, without going too far afield, I'm suggesting that one of the areas we desperately need to find assistance in is how to bring blacks directly into the political operation. I don't think it takes any great technical knowledge. Maybe some people say, "well that's easy for you to say," but listen I tell everybody who didn't know it. I came from far afield from politics, maybe not far afield because I'm a lawyer, but I was not in the political structure when I ran for office and I found that the people who I was being told were the master politicians, yes they knew what they were doing, but it wasn't anything that anybody else couldn't learn either.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:17:56.390
No I think that's true. On the other hand so much has been said about the club, that you have to join the club, you have to join the organization, you have to join some organization.

Basil Paterson 00:18:03.940
Not in black politics you don't, not in black politics you don't. Jesse Gray comes out of the Tenants Organization, gets elected assemblyman, and he knows a great deal about politics because he's been out there in the politics of the black community, which means community action, community activities, you're talking about tenants rights, you're talking about consumer rights, you're talking about bread and butter issues as in no other community. That's what black politicians have to know about. It's fine if they want to be interested in some of the other things. And frankly we're finding that some of those other things that we weren't interested in...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:18:33.470
... are more important...

Basil Paterson 00:18:34.270
... are damned important...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:18:35.021
...are just as important...

Basil Paterson 00:18:35.025
Sure. What's happening with the insurance companies what's happening in those banking...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:18:38.900
What's happening with the oil companies...

Basil Paterson 00:18:40.250
Absolutely, absolutely.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:18:42.470
So when you, let's say you want to give advice to young blacks who are interested in this, you're right there are many of the activities that any young black, and any older black for that matter, that might have might be involved in. The nucleus of black political leadership in the past has been church. And of course we can see that's changing, and we get all the organizations like civil service organizations, labor organizations, and they produce some of our leaders. But what about the idea that these ideological movements might produce some leaders? True, these early civil rights objectives in terms of eliminating some of the physical segregation and so on have been achieved, but some of the other things such as, you know, black people controlling their own turf, having control of certain social agencies, having control of certain communities, really have not been achieved and there are ideological positions which suggests that we should mold ourselves around some type of collective black position, and out of that our leaders should emerge, as against the traditional, which you described earlier, political process of coming through organizations and coming through clubs and so on. What about that? Do you think these ideological movements have a... I know they have a place, but I mean do you think that they have the potential of producing more of our leaders than they have to date?

Basil Paterson 00:20:12.890
Well number one I'd have to disagree with you on one thing. Your initial premise that our political leadership came from the church: that may be true in other parts of the United States, but it's not been true essentially in New York City. The only person I can think of, and of course he was a giant, would have been the Reverend Adam Clayton Powell Junior who came from the church and organized... again, that's interesting what he did. He came from the church, but he organized in street movements. The picketing of the shops on 125th Street, the telephone company, the whole movement. The bus boycott which I remember as a kid participating, not even knowing what it was about, but being out there participating with boycott of the buses that came right through Harlem, right up Eighth Avenue...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:20:54.511
... and had no black drivers...

Basil Paterson 00:20:56.150
... and had no black drivers. So that he's the only one I can think of right off the top. In other areas they do come out of the church...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:21:01.750
I was thinking essentially of the South.

Basil Paterson 00:21:03.970
... and the South very definitely that's always been. But it's changing now too...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:21:07.020
It is changing radically.

00:21:07.930
Yes, I'm noticing who some of those young men and young women are who are running for office. But I think when you talk about the ideological base I think that's got to be the area from whence we come into politics because there's nothing new about that concept of controlling your own turf. The only thing that's been new about it is that black people weren't supposed to control their turf. We were shoved into one area, but we were told we could not control it. We didn't control the businesses, we didn't control the schools, we didn't control the homes we lived in, so that ideologically, yes, that's the air from whence it will come, but ideology is only translated, manifested by way of organizational activity. It's all well and good that Basil Paterson gets up makes a statement, but if he only speaks for Basil Paterson and can't at least allege on occasion that he speaks for other people in a group with him, then his voice is not going to be heard. So I'd suggest that yes, I'd agree with that ideological base, but I think it's got to be organizational and interesting enough, in New York to find the different bases that people have formed. I mentioned Jesse Gray before, with the Tenants Organization. Percy Sutton, Charlie Rangel, myself. We came out of the NAACP. I also was very closely associated with Harlem CORE, and Harlem CORE was a very interesting organization. The political strides that they made when they were dealing in the legislature with getting community involvement in our local hospitals, being involved in community control of schools, these were ideological concepts but the people who supported them had to find out what was going on in those areas and had to become expert in schools, experts in hospitals, so that that ideological impact that comes forward, it even forces those who might not have concurred in the past to find out what it's about, and to become a part of it.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:22:53.260
Well looking at the national scene, and of course the national scene always goes to the presidency and to the Congress, and we didn't do too well in terms of the impact on black people in the '72 election. What do you perceive is happening in '75 and '76? Do you think that any national figure other than yourself will emerge in this? Do you feel that through your efforts something will happen to you of a positive nature? Do you think that we are in for hard times for another four years? How do you look at the national scene at this point?

Basil Paterson 00:23:28.720
Well I think '72 was highly significant. You made a comment about it earlier, and I couldn't agree more. And certainly New York Times has never been described as The Black Dispatch...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:23:37.970
But they certainly said the same thing.... they said the same thing and they said the same thing...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:23:40.510
"Keep blacks out."

Basil Paterson 00:23:40.513
that if ever there was an election that that revealed a racial aspect, a racist aspect, to it it was '72. Richard Nixon had great support because he was saying, and in no uncertain terms, "we're gonna keep blacks back. We're going to keep them out. We're going to stop what is alleged to have been this progress that they've been having." And that progress is interesting because in '72, for the first time, the median income in the past decade, of blacks, dipped, went down to 59 percent when it had risen to 61 percent in '70, so that even that alleged progress wasn't really there. I don't know what's going to transpire in '76, but I'll tell you this, I am not encouraged, and I'm not a pessimist by nature but I know that right within the Democratic Party, and the fight that several of us are conducting on the national scene, there is this effort to say "let's not go to either extreme, let's stay away from going too far to the left...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:24:33.160
That's always bad.

Basil Paterson 00:24:34.450
... too far to the right. Let's come back towards the middle. It's very hard for black people to think in times of middle of the road. Middle of the road has never meant progress for us it's never meant...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:24:43.030
Middle of the road means keeping things the way they are, and the way are is not good.

Basil Paterson 00:24:45.220
The status quo is always debilitating to black people.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:24:48.700
And fifty thousand more housing units isn't a drop in the bucket in terms of what black people need.

Basil Paterson 00:24:52.840
Isn't a drop in the bucket, and we're not even getting that from the federal government at this time.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:24:56.320
Yeah, and of course that really is the other part of it, that things have regressed so badly and in order to, you know, readjust the situation, we may have to go through that period of transition.

Basil Paterson 00:25:07.840
Well you have Henry Marsh in Richmond who's the vice mayor, who talks in terms of building our strength on a local level. Then again we've got our own Congressman Charles Rangel from Manhattan, and from Harlem essentially, who's now the chairman of the Black Congressional Caucus and they're talking in terms of finding ways and means on any given issue to get support for programs that would be beneficial to black people.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:28.360
There's an interesting poster that's about... it shows a picture of Shirley Chisholm and George Wallace, "is this going to happen in 1976?"

Basil Paterson 00:25:37.600
I don't have any great fear of the concept, but I always have a dread of the reality. Whenever we have been asked to ally ourselves with various extremist groups who are...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:49.180
We always lose.... who have gotten to where they were by...

Roscoe C. Brown 00:25:51.490
... beating on us...

Basil Paterson 00:25:51.880
... swinging on us, I've found we haven't gotten that middle of the road compromise. It's always been we compromised and they picked up the marbles. I'd like to suggest one thing though that one of the things that we do have more than we've had before, something I said earlier in the program, we have more people who are involved, who are putting full time in on politics, and who are doing a job. You take a look at our black congressional caucus. They are not just other congressmen. They are an outstanding group of people.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:26:21.170
And they are a group of people that have to be reckoned with on many issues.

Basil Paterson 00:26:24.990
Primarily because they know their business.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:26:26.670
Particularly when Nixon tried to impound the funds. It was the Congressional Black Caucus that led the movement, along with Common Cause, to get those funds moving again.

Basil Paterson 00:26:36.240
That's right.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:26:36.870
And of course that is one of the things going to happen. And also within the Republican movement there is Ed Brooke, who is black, and who has some at least visible validity in terms of his impact. Now do you think that's going to be a mix that even the Republicans are going to have to deal with?

Basil Paterson 00:26:56.550
Not yet.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:26:57.450
They're not ready.

Basil Paterson 00:26:58.980
I'd say to you very quickly named someone after Ed Brooke in the Republican Party. [crosstalk] That's our problem. If there were others in there, then maybe we'd have this this concept of causing two parties to vie for our support. But at this stage the only party in which we have numbers, in which we have been able to get some minimal response, has been the Democratic Party. And I don't say that in saluting the Democrat Party.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:21.990
And of course you do recognize very clearly the difference between the Democratic Party nationally and some of its local enclaves, in which there have been a variety of [unintelligible] of progress and non-progress.

Basil Paterson 00:27:32.160
Frankly, Eastland is a Democrat, and a very powerful Democrat.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:33.750
Surely. And that's the reality that we're going to have to deal with.

Basil Paterson 00:27:36.931
But it's interesting to find that even Eastland now wants to start talking with some of the blacks in Mississippi.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:41.760
Well that's at critical mass.

Basil Paterson 00:27:41.880
It means maybe the brothers are putting things together.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:44.551
That's that critical mass that we were talking about.

Basil Paterson 00:27:46.291
Absolutely. Absolutely.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:47.640
Okay, one last word of advice to young people who want to go into politics...

Basil Paterson 00:27:50.851
Get in.

Roscoe C. Brown 00:27:51.572
Get in. Okay, I think that's a good point on which to close the show tonight. Our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason has been Basil Paterson, vice chairman of the Democratic National Committee. Glad to have you with us tonight, Basil.

Basil Paterson 00:28:01.091
It's been my pleasure, Roscoe.

Announcer 00:28:03.210
You've been listening to Soul of Reason with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro-African Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

