Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:00:01.490
Beautiful surroundings appeal to us all. Interior decorators help create these beautiful surroundings. Hear Ruth Artist, a Black interior decorator, discuss the beauty of Interior Decorating on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:36.761
This is "Soul of Reason". A program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:01:03.790
With us tonight on soul of reason is Ruth Artist who's an interior decorator; has her own interior decorating firm and is going to talk with us about the beauty of interior decorating and Black input into that beauty. And Ruth first of all I'd like to welcome you tonight to tonight's program.

Ruth Artist 00:01:21.130
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:01:22.180
And I should say you're as attractive as your surroundings.

Ruth Artist 00:01:28.161
I'll accept that as a compliment.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:01:30.520
It certainly is. Now could you tell us exactly what an interior decorator does. I think we have a general idea. But sometimes you say well an interior decorator buys things for your home or she tells you where put the painting, where you put the things or what kind of things to get. I suppose you just give us a general overview of what an interior decorator does because this is one of those sort of elusive professions that has a lot of things attached to it.

Ruth Artist 00:02:03.310
Well, interior decorating is. It's a simple job, just like any other job or profession that you would want to go into. Actually, it's consists of planning, designing, and making a checklist. Now that checklist, help you more or less, to help you to solve your problems and also give you an idea of the outlook that you're trying to put together for a person, client, or a company. There are two different ways that you can sort of decorate. You can decorate on the basis of a commercial type of decorating, or you can decorate as domestic decorating. There are some people that you may be called in just as a consultant. For instance, if you were to go out and shop and you buy all your furniture on your own, you wouldn't want anyone to go out. You wouldn't want me to go out and shop for you. And you have no way of sort of arranging your furniture the proper of way of putting it together. And I would go in, sit down with you ,and help you to rearrange your furniture the proper way the, way that it should be put together. Most of the time, when I'm called in on consulting jobs like this,

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:03:16.720
it's too late.

Ruth Artist 00:03:19.151
They have gone out and bought the wrong type of furniture. It's too large

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:03:21.821
That's right. That was going to be my next question.

Ruth Artist 00:03:23.420
Or it's too small to fit in the space that they have to work with.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:03:27.850
That was exactly going to be the question I was going to ask. It's almost like going to a doctor when you've been ill for too long a period of time. But let's begin at the beginning stages. Take the ideal situation where the person hasn't bought the furniture they have space. They're moving into an apartment they're, moving into an office, and I think you listed three steps planning, design, and checklist, which I interpret as what you're going to do first ,second, third and fourth Okay. Could you just sort of brainstorm with us as to how you do this? You were invited to decorate my apartment in my office and how would you go about it?

Ruth Artist 00:04:07.751
Alright, now say if I was calling for Mr. and Mrs. You'd never interview one without the other. You always interview both of them together. Because, if you ever interview them separarte, then you're already starting out with a problem. OK. So you sit down and you talk with them and you sort of get a feel for them, you sort of get an idea what they about, what their activities are. How they live. And you move around into the apartment and then you sort of get it. Now you analyze it and the feeling. You begin to drape this sort of a type of move in your mind. Then you you sort of outline exactly what you have come up with for these two people. Then you go back and you sit down with them, and you outline it and you explain to them exactly what you have. What type of furniture you would suggest for them. Whether maybe modern furniture, antique or complimentary. Now. When I say complimentary, I always use the word complimentary because I attach that to contemporary furniture. Because contemporary furniture is a sort of a way of complimenting your client. Some people like it as a dry run with straight through with contemporary and then some like to sort of combine it with antique furniture.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:05:29.110
Is that a good idea? Because I know I've been to people's homes and sometimes it looks as though an antique piece is just sticking out like a sore thumb. It's as though they purchased it because it's very expensive but it doesn't seem to fit in.

Ruth Artist 00:05:41.801
Well, that's because they didn't display it properly. It can work their way contemporary furniture and antique furniture it fits in very well. As a matter of fact, I did a job a couple of weeks ago with contemporary and antique. But you have to blend the two in together properly. You can't just buy one piece and sit it over on a coffee table or pedestal. This doesn't say anything, it doesn't do anything. If you're going to combine contemporary and antique together, you have to buy more than one piece. You have, for instance, and if you have a cocktail table or an end table or a couch, then you would have to sort of blend it in with what you are working around and what you have. And that would cause for more than one piece of antique.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:06:31.770
Interesting [overlapping]

Ruth Artist 00:06:32.342
You could blend it in with paintings or whatever.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:06:35.250
Now, that is interesting. I noticed as you began to talk, you talked about the furniture pieces themselves. And then, as I was listening to you, then I began to think about well what kind of colors? How do you deal with colors? How do you deal with paintings? Is it true that you really begin with the basic furniture first and then begin to weave in the colors and the paintings and the accessories?

Ruth Artist 00:06:55.440
No, the first thing that you actually would start out with. For instance, if I'm walking into a plain, dry room. There's nothing in this room. The first thing I have to do I have to scale this room down to make sure that I select the proper type of furniture. Then I have to take it [overlapping]

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:07:11.162
When I have to take to scale it down. What do you mean?

Ruth Artist 00:07:15.061
For instance, if you have a room that's by 11 by 12, or 11 by 13, or 11 by 14 you when you scale it down, you know what space you have to work with. So therefore

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:07:24.840
So it's actual working space.

Ruth Artist 00:07:26.731
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:07:27.121
Because in many rooms, there are corners and so on, that are not really very usable.

Ruth Artist 00:07:30.870
Right. Right. And then you would have to take in the, the imagination of the sunlight. What time the sunlight falls in a certain room a certain part of the day whether it's in the afternoon or is early in the morning. Or you don't have enough sunlight at all. This also helps you to decide what type of colors you should use. If it's a very dark room. You would use a bright, cheerful colors. If it's a very bright room, you can't use very loud, blared out colors that will hit you dead in the face when you walk in. You use, more or less, soft colors. And, once you select your colors, then your first thing, the next thing you do, you go to the carpeting. The type of carpet that you would want you would use on the floor. It could be a shag, or could be an Oriental, which today a lot of people are using shags. And shakes are very easy to shampoo, to keep clean.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:08:28.080
That's an interesting thing. I noticed you use the term today. A lot of people are using. Does this suggest then that people's taste and what is considered to be in good taste changes from year to year or in groups of years? Or is what was good taste quote unquote five years ago still good taste today?

Ruth Artist 00:08:51.420
Well let's take as, far as taste, let's take antique. Antique furniture will always be first class. Will all be - always be - considered as good taste. That that type of furniture never, never go out of style. When I suggested the shag - the shag is more, I would say more or less on the modern kick that we are using now today.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:09:16.694
And that is the rug with the long strings coming out of it.

Ruth Artist 00:09:20.041
Right. Right. And today, a lot of people are using, using shades because they consider them compact living, functional type of things. Things that are easy to keep clean and things.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:09:33.061
Is shag easy to keep clean?

Ruth Artist 00:09:34.651
Yes, it is.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:09:35.381
Because it appears with all those strings and threads. It might be more difficult. Why is it easier to keep clean?

Ruth Artist 00:09:40.351
It's easy to keep clean because of the type of fabric that tt's made out of. It's made out of a type of fabric that can be washed. You can, you yourself can, say you buy from a Bloomingdale's or Macy's. You get the Glamourine shampoo and you can now just shampoo it right away and it would dry in the next day or 24 hours it can be used again. Like with a regular Oriental rug you, you would have to make sure to get a professional type of a cleaner that would do your rug properly so that it wouldn't be spotty and it would come out evenly and smooth. But with a shag, you can do it as a domestic job yourself.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:10:23.280
In other words, technology has come to interior decorating and has changed even that particular field. Because by having these new fabrics you are able to do things that you weren't able to do in the past. Now to what extent does the amount of money that a person or business has influenced the way in which you approach your work?

Ruth Artist 00:10:43.230
Well, I've always tried to get my clients to understand that beauty is offered to everyone. Doesn't matter what wage bracket that you're in. You could be say six, seven thousand dollar a year type of a person. You still are offered the beauty, the class. Although you will not approach it the same way that a person that can furnish their apartment completely at one time. But being that you are in a smaller bracket you can take your time. You can concentrate on one room at a time. Select proper furniture. Furniture that will last you the period of time. It doesn't make sense to take your money and and go out and buy say like they have these sales today - three rooms of furniture for certain number dollars. You're not getting, you're not getting the quality. You're not getting what you're paying for. Why concentrate on three rooms when you can take that money and concentrate on one room and do

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:11:48.631
it[overlapping] And do it beautifully.

Ruth Artist 00:11:50.790
And have quality furniture.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:11:53.310
Tonight on "Soul of Reason," we are discussing the beauty of interior decorating with Ruth Artist, who is one of the few Black interior decorators who is working in this field. And after sort of an introduction of what interior decorating is, which I found very interesting as a matter of fact. I'd like to ask you, Ruth, just how many Black interior decorators are there? How did you get into the field and what are some of the things that you are doing yourself in this field.?

Ruth Artist 00:12:23.010
Well my knowledge I only know of two - other than myself- Black interior decorators. And one is in Chicago, Illinois and the other one is in Atlanta.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:12:35.521
Is there an interior decorating association? Do you need a license or something like that?

Ruth Artist 00:12:40.201
Interior decorating, you do not need a license. But you would need your proper papers as far as listing your company or your name you would need your own. Of course you would need your resale number. You cannot go into wholesale places to shop without to resell number.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:12:58.860
And you're also probably have some training do you not?

00:13:00.831
You definitely would have to go to school. I went to New York Design - Interior Designing 155 West 56th street and they have classes that you can separate them. They list them by A, B and C. And you can take a class consist of a designing, or you can take a class consisting of color schemes and you're furnishing. And they break it down in different categories, which you can go for six weeks, eight weeks or, to a year.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:13:33.021
And eventually atfter you've done thi,s then you have gotten the training at the same time, like any practicing profession, you probably have to have a place to use this training.

Ruth Artist 00:13:42.930
Yeah.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:13:43.381
How do you, how does one get into it? Because I know on our show, a number of young Black people hear about different professions. How can I get into i?. How could a young Black person - or even a not so young black person - get into interior decorating? Aside from going to school?

Ruth Artist 00:13:58.171
Right now, I would suggest that if you were interested in getting into into interior decorating it all works on the same order of real estate. You go to school to take up real estate, right? When you finish you have to, more or less, go and sign up with someone for a year or so to get the feel of the marketing business and what it's all about. It's the same category as far as interior decorating. When you get out of school, you sign up with - you can sign up on department store or you can register with someone that are already in the field, or you can register with just a marketing person that's in the furniture outlet. And this way you will get the feel of knowing how to purchase furniture, how to go about it who to contact. And also, get the experience that you would need that you would never get just by going to school. I would advise to register with some company on that, so on.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:14:54.211
Does a person in interior decorating need to be able to draw? Is artistic drawing ability important or is it more a question of the eye and how you put things together?

Ruth Artist 00:15:05.250
Well you would have you have to have knowledge of both. You have to know how to sketch a little bit. I mean, that's a must because, for instance, I bid for a job last week and it consists of a nightclub. And so we'll be taking up two spaces - two floors. Now when you go bid for a job, you can't have a dry run because everyone doesn't have the same imagination that you have. So what you have to do, you have to sort of sketch it out. And as you sketch it out, you also insert your colors or and where you would fit each piece of furniture and wen,t and that - this is where your outline come in again and as you present your sketch to the - to the person that you're trying to more or less get the job from, you then go into your color schemes and they have the sketch right in front of them so therefore they can see exactly what you're talking about. We have to realize that when you work with an outsider, they cannot really put it together and see the way that you see it because you trained to see this way. So you have to have some knowledge of sketching.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:16:16.440
What about the case where you've sketched out something and you made some suggestions and the client says well look this is gonna cost too much. Are your plans flexible enough so that you can cut them back? Or do you have to really go back to the drawing board and start all over again?

Ruth Artist 00:16:31.350
Well, first of all, when when you hire an interior decoratior and an interior decorator's working for you. You have to tell them exactly how much money that you're willing to spend. If you're willing to spend, for instance you say, well look 'I want to have ten thousand dollars." What what can I do? How much can I get from my ten thousand dollars?. So you stay within their budget. You are their servant at that time.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:17:00.390
Now speaking of Blacks in interior decorating, do you think that with the increase in the number of Black middle class people, the explosion in the arts of all types. Many of our black fashion is - many of our fashion designers are Black today. Do you think that there will then be more Blacks going into the field of interior decorating?

Ruth Artist 00:17:22.981
I think so. I would suggest that more would go into it because it's beginning to open up a wide open field now. We have a lot of buildings that are going up that requires interior decorating and and we don't have that many around. And it's a wide open field. They should go into it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:17:43.801
Well let's tell the audience about you. You have an organization. What is your organization? What are some of the kinds of things you're doing in your organization?

Ruth Artist 00:17:53.640
Well the name of my company is La tus Artists.I just finished a big project at the Schomburg Plaza which is located at twelve ninety five [1295] Fifth Avenue. I have three model apartments on display there which, will be on display until October the 1st.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:18:14.730
Now the Schomburg Apartments is one of the new middle-income developments and it's been built right on the northern end of Central Park at Fifth Avenue - Central Park North and Fifth Avenue. And I understand, I have seen some of the beautiful pictures of some of the work that you've done. That you have decorated their basic model apartments. Is that correct.

Ruth Artist 00:18:39.030
I decorated three apartments. One is consist of one bedroom, two bedrooms and three bedrooms.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:18:45.210
I see. And the idea behind this is not only to help. Is this a co-op or a rental building?

Ruth Artist 00:18:52.121
No, it's a rental building.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:18:53.401
But not only to improve the prospects of renting the apartments, but also to show prospective tenants what might be done with the apartments. And then finally, I would assume that you would expect to get some business out of it.

Ruth Artist 00:19:04.561
Definite definite.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:19:06.511
I see. So any of the audience who might want to get an opportunity to look at some of your work, could go to the model apartments at the Schomburg Apartments at 1295 Fifth Avenue. And of course these apartments are named after the well-known Arthur Schomburg of the Schomburg library collection which adds some Black history into it as well. And do you - that's a very interesting point. Speaking of Black history, do you or have you done anything in these apartments that especially reflects the Black or the African motif? Or have you done sort of an eclectic type of thing where you've tried to draw from various cultures and various color forms?

Ruth Artist 00:19:44.940
No I didn't benn towards as far as the Black trends, if you want to put it that way. I more or less decorated on a broad scale.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:19:55.800
Is there any particular reason why you didn't? I'm not saying that you should or shouldn't. I'm just asking if there's any particular reason why you didn't?

Ruth Artist 00:20:02.970
Well it wasn't in any particular reason, it just that I feel in decorating that I decorate for people as a whole, not separating in categories. And I feel that everyone like beautiful furniture and this is the only way and the best way that I can decorate. I feel this way this is the way I have to decorate.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:20:26.501
But let me ask a question, which might cause you to think a little. Suppose a client came to you and said, "Well look I have this apartment and I really want a decorated and kind of a West African motif."

Ruth Artist 00:20:39.601
Then that's a different story.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:20:41.041
Would you be willing to take that on? And how would you go about that?

Ruth Artist 00:20:45.480
Well then that's a different story because, see, I'm working in a different individual. But when you work on a broad scale such as a Schomburg Plaza, and you're you're wide open and you're dealing with more than one person, you know. You more or less decorate it so it will meet the tastes of many, many people, not just one person. It's, you know, you're speaking in a different category.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:21:08.901
Of course, you're really reflecting what an interior decorator tries to do and that is to reflect a whole range of tastes and styles. And as you said, then, to tune in specifically, with the needs of that particular individual. I noticed that you mentioned that there are a lot of new buildings going up in the Black community, in particular, The state office building on 125th Street, the CAB building and many, many others. And there are offices moving into those. People like buying offices in those buildings and there'll be many more opportunities for interior Black interior decorators. Have you had much luck in getting some of those accounts? And if you did, then what did you do in them? And if you didn't, What type of aspiration do you have for getting into some of those type of accounts?

Ruth Artist 00:22:02.580
Well I basically have been working very closely with HUD from the federal and city type of projects, which they are in the urban development and I usually work very closely with them. And this is the way I am or less, getting my outlook on exactly what's happening in this city. And once these type of things come out, then I begin to bid for these jobs. You have to bid. You're not the only one that's bidding. As I mentioned before, I bid for this nightclub two weeks ago, and it's three other people that was bidding right along with me. But at least this is one way that you can keep an eye open on exactly what's happening by going through the HUD federal and urban redevelopment. Because they have the outlook and input as far as what's happening within the community. But I don't think they should - you should just stay locally yourself just in the community. I think you should, more or less look going out on a broad scale.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:23:07.081
And speaking of that, I would assume, that even though there's a lot of building and development going on in the Black community, there's a lot of building and development going out throughout the New York metropolitan area. And with affirmative action, and the awareness of people in the majority society of minority people who can do a variety of things, I imagine that opportunities will open up but in particularly office decorating as well as home decorating.

Ruth Artist 00:23:32.340
And I forgot to mention, the UDC is also helping interior decorators that want to go into this field. You sort of make connection with them also because they are also involved in urban renewal.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:23:49.650
Just to refresh the memories of our audience, you did mention one school in New York where - I imagine it must be several others - -where young people interested in interior decorating might attend and that's

Ruth Artist 00:24:04.831
New York Interior Design 155 West 56 street.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:24:09.420
I see now that's a specialized school that's somewhat different than fashion design.

Ruth Artist 00:24:13.621
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:24:13.623
It's focus is explicitly on interior design, although some of the aspects of it might be similar. Like the ability to sketch, the ability to eye colors and things of this type. Now when you approach doing a design for an office or for a suite How do you approach that because the office is different from a home. And you said if you go into a home you talk to the man and the woman. But when you go into the office do you talk to the boss or you talk to the office manager or you talk to the owner of the corporation. How do you deal with that. Because I could say that could provide some very interesting problems for you.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:24:13.623
It's focus is explicitly on interior design although some of the aspects of it might be similar. Like the ability to sketch ability to do with colors and things of this type. Now, when you approach doing a design for an office or for a suite, how do you approach that? Because the office is different from a home. And you said if you go into a home you talk to the man and the woman. But when you go into the office, do you talk to the boss? Or do you talk to the office manager, or do you talk to the owner of the corporation? How do you deal with that? Because I could see that could provide some very interesting problems for you. Well, and apparently from the way you smile you've had them already [laughter]

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:25:38.810
What I was thinking about is sometimes in an office, the quality of different offices has to do with the prestige of the people in the firm and one vice president might become a little upset because another vice president has something in his office or has it decorated in a way that tends to be a little bit better. Do you have much interaction? Or is it just as you say, the decorator comes in decorates the office and that's it.

Ruth Artist 00:26:05.130
Wel,l you see of course they, they they give you an idea of the type of furniture that they want whether it's as modern or contemporary. And no one would ever want to it flashy or whatever and they give you a feel of what they have in mind and you take it from there. That's one reason why they hire interior decorators. If they're gonna tell you everything what to do, then they don't need me.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:26:26.431
That's it. That's an interesting approach. [laughter] On the other hand, there is that type of interaction that goes on whenever you're providing a service. You know the client has his particular needs or her particular needs. You have your particular professionalism and I think you're right.

Ruth Artist 00:26:41.130
Before I go. Excuse me. But before I go - really go ahead on any job. I usually check back with my client. Once they agree then that's it.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:26:50.430
All right. For those in the audience who might be interested in getting in touch with you, how might someone get in touch with. What is it Latus Artistes?

Ruth Artist 00:26:59.190
Yes. They can call 2-1-2 2-3-3 5-9-1-0, 2-3-3-5-9-1-0 and that's Latus Artistes.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:27:10.291
Right. And I gather that Artistes is sort of a play on your name, Ruth Artist.

Ruth Artist 00:27:15.181
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:27:17.631
Now as we have come the close the program, what kind of advice would you give to young Black people who want to get into interior decorating?

Ruth Artist 00:27:28.710
I would like to see more young Black people involved in interior decorating because as I said it is a wide open field and they would have to become a complete field to really play and display whatever that they have in mind. And I think that they should go to school, and take up interior decorating and from that then they can go sign up with a company and get the feel of what's happening. This way, they will not be lost once they get out into the market.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown 00:27:59.980
That's a beautiful way in which to close about the beauty of interior decorating I'd like to thank Ruth Artist, interior decorator, for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Ruth Artist 00:28:07.770
Thank you.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:09.121
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. And featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department. In cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

