Speaker 1 00:00:21.680
This is Soul of Reason, a program that will examine the roots of the black thought.

Speaker 2 00:00:27.710
Soul of reason is produced by the NBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:48.920
The Negro Ensemble Company's presentation of Paul Carter Harrison's play, "The Great MacDaddy," has just completed a successful run at the Theatre De Lys in Greenwich Village. The creative choreography of a young black choreographer, Dianne McIntyre, was one of the real highlights of this play. And tonight on "Soul of Reason" we'll be talking with Dianne McIntyre, not only about "The Great MacDaddy," but about her dance company, Sounds and Motion, and all of the other things that you do in the move... a move... the world of movement. And speaking of the world of movement, Dianne, we're glad to have you with us tonight. And could you tell us a little something about how you got into this particular field? You were a dancer from childhood, or did you learn it in college, or what have you.

Dianne McIntyre 00:01:33.170
Well I've been told by my parents that I started dancing as soon as I started walking. So I guess it's a thing that came from childhood. I've always loved dancing, and I've always liked creating dances. So as a child when I'd hear the music on the radio, I made up dances to those things, and then I would gather the children in the neighborhood and we would put on little shows at the local library and for our parents and for the other children in the school. So as I got older I began taking dance lessons, as a teenager, and then I decided to try to pursue the career in a more professional way, and I became a dance major at Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio. So that was where I guess I really decided that I wanted to go into this field. It was kind of a big decision because other of my peers were doing, you know, going into economics and political science and you know, chemistry and pre-law, those kind of things. But I said, well, I'm going to try to dance, and try to say things that I believe in as a black person in this country through the movement. So I've tried to combine some of the things that I feel just as a person with my love for the dance. So I guess...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:00.620
How did you end up in New York?

Dianne McIntyre 00:03:02.661
Well...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:02.663
Other than the fact that New York is the dance capital of the world.

Dianne McIntyre 00:03:05.510
Right, I tried to avoid it for many years. I didn't think that I could deal with living in the city. I used to come here in the summertime to take classes as a... while I was in college, and I taught for a year in Wisconsin. But I found that I was not fulfilled, really, I was not getting enough from the, you know, from the other people I was around.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:31.620
Enough reciprocal innovation as it were.

Dianne McIntyre 00:03:33.290
Right, right. So I decided to come here, I came here in '71, to try to do some more study, and to perhaps do some dancing and see what I could find here.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:44.990
And you haven't left since.

Dianne McIntyre 00:03:46.040
No, I thought I'd be gone by now. But I started a company, which at first was really just a, you know, group of people, we did performances here and there, but it has become a permanent thing.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:59.750
Well, speaking of being a choreographer, I understand that you're one of the few blacks, and one of the few black women, choreographers who do dances, or prepare dances, and choreograph Broadway plays. How did you happen to get into that? Is that something that just, you fell into, or was it something that you actually started out to try to do?

Dianne McIntyre 00:04:22.680
Well, I've.... Well, I was first a dancer, but when I came to the city I found that there weren't a number of companies that I thought I would want to dance with. So I guess in a backwards sense I became a choreographer because I didn't see enough work out there that I thought was fulfilling, so that I became very much interested in this area because I thought there was a need for it. Now there are some special... I originally choreographed only for my own company, but the Negro Ensemble Company was the first organization to ask me outside of my own group to do some work, and it was like it was a risk for them because I hadn't done anything like that before. That was about three years ago.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:11.780
What was the first play you choreographed?

Dianne McIntyre 00:05:14.300
Well that was "The Great MacDaddy." The original was first done three years ago at NEC. So it was because usually in... for some reason in today's world most of the choreographers are men and the black choreographers are usually men, although in the past there... Pearl Primus and Katherine Dunham were...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:37.020
They were the first, really.

Dianne McIntyre 00:05:37.710
Right, right. And for some reason the women have not picked up on it as much, but I'm learning why, because it's difficult, it is very difficult not only to do the work and maintain a company, but also to gain the respect of those people who are... who are working for you.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:56.010
Now why is that? You've mentioned a statement which could almost be translated as a sexist statement. It's difficult to do. It's difficult for a woman to get the respect of a company, or is it just that it's hard work?

Dianne McIntyre 00:06:08.580
Well, it's both. There... it's a great deal of work for anybody, a man, woman, to try to organize a company, and then, you know, get the funding to support all of the people, and then to get the word out there that you're doing dances. But the other thing outside of working with my own company, I think people have to take a little time they step back and see this. You know, a young black woman making dances, and for this period of time being their director, and it's just it's just a different idea for them so that each time I have to come in and prove myself, and I'm not really a person in the, you know, in the women's lib area, but I'm realizing that there that there is a type of prejudice on, on first sight. You know, for a black woman doing this type of thing.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:04.850
Yeah, that's interesting that the breakthrough in terms of black dance was made by Katherine Dunham...

Dianne McIntyre 00:07:11.250
Right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:11.733
... and by Pearl Primus. Part of it was that it was sort of ethnic...

Dianne McIntyre 00:07:15.481
Right, right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:17.070
... and that black women were supposed to be exotic, jump around, and leap, and be sexy, and so on. Now practically every play, every musical certainly, has a lot of dance in it which is not necessarily ethnic. It's expressive of a variety of culture forms.

Dianne McIntyre 00:07:35.960
Right, right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:36.611
And it might be that even though black women opened the door...

Dianne McIntyre 00:07:41.650
Mm hmm.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:42.450
... more black men moved in to fill that gap, and also it might be due to the fact that more men are dancing now, too.

Dianne McIntyre 00:07:47.540
Right, right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:48.500
And there is in our society, both among whites and blacks...

Dianne McIntyre 00:07:51.510
Mm hmm.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:51.960
... a tremendous amount of sexism. Men unfortunately don't feel that women can do as much in the way of leadership as men...

Dianne McIntyre 00:07:59.690
Right.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:00.901
... and you really are to be congratulated for your efforts. Well, let's talk about "MacDaddy." Mm hmm.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:04.652
"The Great MacDaddy" is sort of a satire in a sense, but same time as it's a satire, it has lot truth in it about the black experience. Right. And it goes back to a family in Los Angeles and Savannah. What is the name, "Wine," who is trying to... Right. ... to locate his roots in a sense. That's the way I translate the play. Well, right... The search for roots, really... Right, right. MacDaddy really is experiencing an odyssey. He goes from Los Angeles across the country searching for a mythical character named Wine, who is... Wine... He was a... His father owned a still, and Wine has the formula for the... for the wine. So... For that elixir of life that keeps us all moving! [laughs] Right, right, so as he goes across the country he runs into different people, and he grows as a person as he experiences different things. And all of it is, is, it's very unusual. The people that he meets and the things that happen to him. It's in a sense maybe a type of original black fairy tale, but all the characters are... have a basis in reality or in our black folklore. And it's very... it's a very daring work. A lot of people, including a lot of black people, say they don't understand it. Mm hmm. And the reason I use that terminology of sort of a search for roots, because in this odyssey, what he's really doing is rediscovering and analyzing the various personality styles and themes that exist in the black community. Right. And he's doing it in the metaphorical sense... Mm hmm. ... and metaphorical plays are difficult for people understand in general, and then when you add onto it the black experience... Mm hmm. [laughs] ... because maybe black people live a metaphor for the rest of their lives anyway. Right. Well, some of that, some of it, I think, is also the form that we've been used to looking at, a certain type of musical, you know, format, and the format of this play is very different. And I think that people have had a hard time understanding it just because of what they've seen before, so that you know, you know, if we can break down some of the, you know, the stereotypes of what the play must be, or what the musical must be, I think people could look at it in a little bit freer way. What did you do in choreographing for "MacDaddy" to help create this feeling of of exploration, this feeling of mysticism, this feeling of reaching back for roots. What did you do as you did this choreographing? Well, one of the things that the author was interested in was a type of African feeling going through all of the work, even though it takes place here in this country at different times in the century, he wanted there to be a type of African base in the, in the movement. So originally, when I first did the work, I did some research. For instance, the first section is a funeral where all the dancers do a Charleston piece, and he wanted a strong connection between, originally, the original Charleston, and African movement. So I went back and talked to people, I, you know, I did things with people who originally did the Charleston, and then I connected it with what I thought were the roots, African roots, in the Charleston. And it wasn't difficult at all because they're right there, they're, you know, the movement is the same. And for other parts in the play, the dancing is very important because it forwards the action of the play. None of the dance pieces are like production numbers, where they're separate, then you go back into it. There is one section where a character, called Dance, subdues one of the characters, who is called Signifying Baby, and because of her dance someone is able to come in and take the baby away in a straight jacket. So it's not that she just does a pretty dance, but her movement is instrumental in forwarding the action of the play, and that's the way that the work was written, so that all the dances and all the songs are meaningful in that way, not just an extra little number that was stuck in there. So it's a total flow. As I hear you describe this, I'm wondering if you're going to get put out the choreographers union... Why's that? [laughs] Because very seldom do I hear choreographers so clearly and explicitly stating what they are trying to do... Mm hmm. ... through the dance that they are choreographing... Uh huh. ... you see it if you know dance, and you've been around, you see what they're trying to do, but... Mm hmm. ... very seldom do choreographers, or musicians, or even ballplayers, tell... Tell you about it. ... exactly what they're trying to do in terms of trade secrets. Right, no, it's a... I don't usually, you know, but I'm on this radio program... I think it's beautiful! ... you know, and I think if it helps people to come closer to what, you know, the kind of things we're trying to do... To understand, see that's really the point. Right, right. It isn't so much that you're trying to present something that's just beautiful and mystical and the like, but it's to help people to understand, you know... Right. ... what the movements are, for example. The point that you made about the African movements in the Charleston is something, you know, some people talk about it, but then to really have studied it... Right. ... because one thing I was impressed by is your willingness to go back and actually study the material. And having worked with performers in various mediums myself, I am aware of the fact that the really good creative people do go back and study... Right. ... so when they create a scene or a dance or a film sequence, they generally have studied the culture or the movements or even the emotion that's involved in this. Speaking of the emotion, how, what role does emotion, in a feeling, have in choreographing a dance? Because you discussed this earlier, you really talked about the meaning of what was happening, almost a literal and figurative meaning. What about the emotion itself, the emotion within the dancer, the emotion within the piece? What role does that play? Well, this is always different for different choreographers, but just my own personal thing is that the intent or the emotional content of the dance is always the impetus for what I do. The technique of the movement comes out of whatever the intent of the work is. There's some movement... or some choreographers work first of all from the movement, or from the technical skills of the dancer. And there may be some emotional qualities, they're given out by the dancers just from their own feelings, but they may not have been explained to the dancer by the choreographer. But I work in the opposite way, where I have first the people understanding what they are dancing about, and whatever movements come out, or I create, come out of whatever that emotional content is. So that's the primary thing for me at this particular point. And it... but it varies with, with I think, as... I think that's one of the major differences between the dance of black choreographers and white choreographers, although it's not necessarily a steadfast rule. But usually the emotional content comes out in our work first. Tonight on "Soul of Reason" we are talking with Dianne McIntyre who is a choreographer whose most recent work on Broadway has been the Negro Ensemble Company's "Great MacDaddy." But speaking of choreographers and black dance, it's generally agreed that black dance is probably the mostly exciting dance in the theater today, the dance theater. We have the Dance Theatre of Harlem, we have Elio Pomare, we have Rod Rodgers, we have Alvin Ailey, and now we have Dianne McIntyre and Sounds in Motion. It seems to run in cycles. Right now Ailey seems to be in... Right. ... whereas at one time one of the other groups was in. Why is that? Is that because a particular choreographer comes up with a way of approaching movement, like Ailey is very physical and very dramatic in what he does, as against not quite as ethnic all the time? You know, a whole range of things. What is it? Or is it just merchandising? I hate to be crass about it, but sometimes we know that in the arts one particular art form gets pushed ahead of another, or group in the arts because of the fact that they happen to have gotten a hit number, or happen to have gotten a hit play, or happen to be at the right time at the right place. What is it? Why is it that, do you think, for example, Ailey is right on top now? He's very good, outstanding, but there are many other outstanding dance groups that probably don't get quite the ink and publicity that Ailey does. Right. Well, I think one thing is that, you see, Alvin Ailey has been out here for a long time, like he's been over the past five years, has been highly recognized, but he has really struggled for many years, and there was a long time where he was not recognized, or where he was known maybe, like you know, like some of the other companies now. But he was out there pushing and pushing. But over the last several years he's had very strong people with him who were instrumental in making his public relations, and you know his, his booking, his management has really, you know, on his board of directors are really at such a high level that they've been able to push the work out there. And the other thing is that Alvin's work has become very acceptable to the general public, so that people who are not necessarily dance theater goers have been able to see his work and felt comfortable with it, and because of this, this has helped the rest of us in the modern dance world in general, because there was a time when I was saying "well, I'm a modern dancer," and people did not know what I was talking about, but now I can say "well, have you heard of the Ailey company?" and they have, because it's become a popular entity, and that they can relate a little bit to what I might do even though they haven't seen it, because they have heard of his company. But it's been a struggle for him over the years, and now, you know, he has his reward in being a very popular company. But I think it's both of those things, the people, the, you know, the public relations and also the popularity and the type of style that he, that he uses. Well, "struggle" is a key word in almost all black hearts. It's certainly a key word in black theater, and it is a key word in black dance, and probably a key word in dance generally. I've always been impressed, as I've gone to dance concerts, that many of the people who come to these concerts [are] sort of like an in-group of people. Right, right. It's almost as though sometimes the people who attend, even though may not be dancers, don't want other people to come and appreciate it, because they might be learning some of the secrets and the language and the esoteric nature of dance, and of course dance is as old as man himself, and is really a part of the culture. I think the one thing that might be helping modern dance to be more accepted generally, white and black, is its use in television commercials. Mm. Mm hmm. It has tremendous amount. If you, now if you think about it, it may not be the best dance in terms of what you would consider to be the highest quality of dance, but many, many television commercials, almost most... Are using movement. ... have some form of movement. It may not be a long number, but it's enough to get people thinking about that. Right. So that might be an additional factor. Now, what about your group? What are you trying to do in Sounds in Motion? Well, in Sounds in Motion I'm trying to do exactly the opposite of what you just said. See, when I first came to New York I experienced that too. There was... I always saw the same people at all the dance concerts. There was like a little in-group, and I wanted to make a company that would do work that could be seen by any and everybody, so that I have a company of dancers. There are seven dancers and four musicians and this past year... Well, we do works that, well, some of these things I say because this is what people write about me. I do works that, you know, spring from the black experience but they come out of, you know, my own being, or the things that I see and other choreographers' work that I'd like to have with us. And... but they are... they come out of the black experience just because they come out of us, and out of the dancers, and we work with live music as often as possible. Now this past... That's very interesting... Mm hmm.... because that's somewhat new for dance, because... Uh huh.... I have been too close to too many dance studios that I just hear the same number going over and over and over again... Right, right, on the tape recorder... ... on the record. ... or the record player, right. And why is that? That's very interesting why is it that you use live music? Well I've been interested in, I know that this is the original way that it was... See, before there were records or tape recorders, before the technology... that the dance and the music belong together in a live way. Also from, you know, our cultural heritage. So when I started the company I said I was going to try to do this, and maintain this, as long as I could. So that one reason at first was that I worked with musicians who were in more the new vein of music, playing a type of new music, or... that is not necessarily categorized. And I heard great profound things in the music, and some other people could not relate to it. So it was my intention to work with the music, and visualize the music, so that people who may not have felt as close to it could hear it, and understand what some of these musicians were trying to do. Now you're talking about what we generally call avant garde jazz? Maybe. Right. Right. That's one of the categories of it, right. And... so that I thought that this was one of my missions, to bring the music and dance together, and help visualize it so that people could hear it, but also to go back to the way our music and dance originated. And this has been a struggle over the years, to try to maintain a place, and just economically trying to keep the musicians with us, because it's much easier to work with, you know, with the record all the time. Where do you generally perform? Do you have a home studio, as it were? Right, well right now we are based at the Studio Museum in Harlem. We have dance classes there, and we rehearse there, and also at St. Mark's Church at 137th and St. Nicholas. In the next couple of weeks we'll be, we'll be moving because I think the museum is relocating but... Where is the museum going to relocate? I'm not sure. It's very interesting, because the Studio Museum is one of the... I guess one of the premiere cultural institutions in Harlem... Right r,ight. And really doing a great job against some very very difficult odds. They have, and we feel, you know, it has been a great honor for us to be there as part of their establishment, because we have our classes and our rehearsals right there in the gallery, so that then we're inspired by the artwork surrounding us. Well, that's one of the new developments in black arts in particular, and that is a bridging of dance and music and theater, and the visual arts and even poetry... Right, right. ... so that part of what might be called a black cultural revolution is the articulation between the various art forms... Mm hmm. ... which I think is beginning to spill over into the larger society, because at one time the so-called "classical" arts were very upper class, and very isolated from the masses, both white and black. Right, uh huh. And what is happening now, I think, as a result particularly of the black cultural movement... Mm hmm. ... is that the masses are beginning to realize that there isn't any clear differentiation between the visual art and poetry and dance and music and film. Right. And something like having a dance class in an art studio... Mm hmm. ... tends to bring that out as clearly as anything. It does, it really, and... and... and the effect is seen in the way we move in a completely different way when they change the show. You know, I did a very heavy work at a time when they had a show up with caskets. You know, there were caskets in all the paintings all around, and everything I did was very somber and low. And then, you know, the next month they had, you know, very bright colors all around, with pictures of beautiful black women. And you know, my whole thing just, it just changed, but besides being there we do performances mostly in colleges and universities around the country. And this spring we did a great number of performances in Southern black colleges, and that was really [a] very rewarding experience. Rod Rodgers resigned some weeks ago, and he was talking about the, I think it's the sponsored program for the National Endowment for the Arts, I guess it is, or the Humanities... The National Endowment for the Arts, right. ... and they sponsor dance companies to the various colleges, and that seems to be a very good milieu in which to introduce dance. Right. The college students tend to be a little bit more adaptive. Mm hmm. And as a result they take it back home to their home communities... Right, right. ... and people begin to ask for more of dance. Yeah, they do, and we find that more and more, as we go around, that there are just more and more young people interested in the dance. But not only young people, see, I have met some older people in the audience that have told me that this was something they always dreamed of doing, of dancing. So then when I talk to the younger people, or maybe, you know, playing an instrument, maybe they had a beautiful voice but they didn't pursue this as a career. So when we see the younger people I tell them about these older people who have talked to me, and if there's anything that they can do in themselves, if they have this love, this dream inside of them, to try to pursue it, bec... so that later in their lives they won't look back and say "well, I wish I had," you know. How many people are in your company, and are most of them black, most of them women or males, or what? Right, there... we're an all black company. There are seven dancers, three men and four women. One of the women is me, so it's almost even. And we have four musicians with us, and two... we have, you know, a technical crew that travels with us, two technical people. I understand that your company will be giving the first guest dance performance at the Brooklyn Museum's "Two Centuries of Black American Art" exhibit that begins on June 25th. Right. And I guess you'll be doing it right in the museum, right? Well no, I believe it's outside. Outside in front of the museum. In the foyer there, or in the am... sort of like an amphitheater, right? Right.Right  off of Eastern Parkway. Right. So that they s... you know, they see us first, and then we... then you know... Then they're motivated to go look at the art! [laughs] Right. We'll be doing a work called "Free Voices," which is about the history of black people through music and dance. Has that ever been done before, or is your first performance of it? Right, it has been done, but we've done it mostly in those, you know, those colleges. Hasn't been done very often here in the city. I certainly look forward to seeing it, and I think those in the audience who could check this out, should check out Sounds in Motion and Dianne McIntyre. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Dianne McIntyre, who is a choreographer who has most recently choreographed "The Great MacDaddy," which has closed in the Village, but I understand is going to open in Washington D.C. ... Right, in the fall. ... sometime in the fall. And we've been talking about the role of the black woman choreographer, and the role of black dance in our society. We're glad to have you with us tonight, Dianne. Oh, thank you Dr. Brown, I've enjoyed it. You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience for the soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

