Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.360
Black art is exploding all about us. What is Black art? What are the themes in today's Black art? How can the public help Black artists? Hear James Neal of the National Artists Coalition discuss these questions on tonight's SOUL OF REASON.

Radio Bumper intro 00:00:36.910
This is SOUL OF REASON, a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:03.830
With us on tonight's SOUL OF REASON is James Neal of the National Artists Coalition. And we're going to talk about some new developments in Black art. And I'd like to welcome you to the program tonight, Jim.

James Neal 00:01:14.750
Thank you.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:15.920
Now, as we start the program, possibly it would be helpful to the audience for you to explain exactly what the National Artists Coalition is. I know there are a number of groups of artists, Collective Black Artists, Emergency Cultural Coalition, etc.; and here we have now the National Artists Coalition. And could you tell us something about this group, how it came about, what it's trying to accomplish?

James Neal 00:01:40.730
Right. The National Artists Coalition was formed by three ex-offenders: myself, Mr. Carl Diego, Mr. Otis Thomas. The purpose that it was formed was to help ex-offenders when they come out of the institution by giving them a place to paint, a place to exhibit, by giving them references to places where they might get artistical help, regardless of it's in fine arts, commercial arts, or in literary arts, or drama. We try to more or less promote the ex-offender into this field of creativity. Also, we deal with a lot of children. We teach children who try to bring number [phonetic] to a Black awareness. Otherwise, we took a poll and out of a hundred people -- only one -- only one could name one famous Black artist.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:41.390
That's really a trip. That really is something else. And one of the things that you hope to do through your organization is to increase the general awareness level of the public and particularly young people, particularly schoolchildren, about Black art and about Black artists. So let's look into the question of how you define, and how your group defines, Black art, because there is some real confusion. And I would say wide difference of opinion among artists who are Black as to what constitutes Black art?

James Neal 00:03:13.010
The way we look at Black art -- the people of the National Artists Coalition -- is Black Art is a legacy just like any other art. Otherwise, without art, you wouldn't have a history. You wouldn't know of the Neanderthal man, a Java man. You wouldn't know about the Sphinx of Egypt or the Colossus of Rome [sic], if it wasn't for the various fine artists, various architects, the various individuals that tried to convey a message through simplicity. That's what we call art, simplicity. And the Black artist in our organization, what they primarily do, they paint things that are in the environment. Otherwise, they paint children on stoops with basketballs. They paint old people sitting on the subways. They paint the buildings in the various ghettos. And it's not just an organization dealing primarily with Black people, because our whole function is to bring about national and international awareness of art, of creativity to everybody. And our membership is, in the vicinity right now -- active members -- we have about 55 or 60, and...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:39.490
They are all working artists, I gather.

James Neal 00:04:42.140
The majority of them are. Otherwise we have Judy Gerber [phonetic] of Columbia University. We have Benny Andrews, Cliff Joseph of the Black Emergency Cultural Coalition. We have Barbara Rantell [phonetic], Art Behind the Walls, Theater for the Forgotten and the whole function is we have made an alliance. We started an organization called the Prison Cultural Alliance to help the individuals in the jails, and to help the individuals out of the jails, and to help the children keep out of the jails. This is the basic function of the National Artists Coalition. We hope to open up a gallery soon to exhibit not just ex-offenders' work or pre-offenders children's work, but we're also starting on a senior citizens' workshop and that should be in function, active function, by the end of this month, October.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:52.890
It's very interesting that many of the ex-offenders and offenders, when they are in institutions, turned to art as a means of self development and expression. Some have turned to poetry and writing, and we know some great writing, particularly the work of Joyce Jackson and Eldridge Cleaver, that came out of the institutions. But more recently, we've seen a real explosion in terms of art in the institutions; and then the very, very creative, and useful, and effective work that folks like yourself do out of the institutions. Why is it that art is such an important part of the development of the individual in our penal institutions?

James Neal 00:06:45.700
Institutional-wise, a person is very limited. Otherwise, I have taught art in the Brooklyn House of Detention for the past year and a half. And I find that this is the only free expression that a person that is incarcerated have, regardless of the race, color, religion, because when they locked in they cell, the same man that lock a Black man in, lock the white man in, lock the Latin man in, or whoever may be incarcerated. So what they do -- what we try to help them do -- is get in to a creative field. Otherwise, this is theirs. This is theirs. They can project what they see, what they visualize. It helps keep down tension. It help keep them independent. It helps keep they self-respect. So in so far as the majority of the inmates who are incarcerated, dealing with various aspects of art, they find that this is the only thing that they could possess, which is theirs, because everything else could be taken away.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:03.880
That's very interesting because I know that you, along with Benny Andrews and some of the other artists, have been working in the institutions in the New York area for the past three or four years. And sometimes I hear stories from you as to how the management of the institutions -- the administration -- get a little uptight about these artists coming in. And yet you point out very clearly that art is a way of reduction of tensions and also a way of self-development. They might be able to take a poem away from someone, but it's difficult to take an art form away from someone because it's in his head, or in her head, and it's on the canvas. Now, in doing this artwork, do you deal only with oils; or do you deal with water; do you deal with sculpture; or do you deal with other forms of art as well?

James Neal 00:08:53.770
We deal with multimedia. Otherwise, that a person may be suited for pastel, so we don't try to push him into oils. Person may be suited better for acrylics; somebody might prefer paper mache; somebody might prefer making collages. What we try to do is start him from the fundamentals -- the basic forms, basic eight forms: cube, triangle, cylinder, cone, sphere, so on. And from that, take him through all the various aspects. Otherwise, from the drawing pencil, to the charcoal, to the pastel, to the thermal paint, to the acrylics, to the oil and the various other things that's in between. And we find this way that a person have more of a chance to find himself and to excel at what they are... you are drawn to more. But the main thing is not the medium, but it is the work. And the work is excellent. We have... last year we had an exhibit at Philharmonic Hall for ex-offenders and people that are still incarcerated. There was another exhibit at the Ethical Cultural Society for ex-offenders. They have a exhibit every year called Art Behind the Walls. And this go in augment [phonetic] people who paint, they win prizes in portrait categories. One of my partners won the prize three years running: the first Plowright [phonetic] prize in portrait category. And we find that this here not only help inspire the artists, but this here also help bring about awareness to the general public, in so far as what is going on in the institutions: how the people in the institutions are thinking about the people outside of the institutions; and they just bring about a whole legacy? Because each picture -- like they say a picture is worth a thousand words -- each individual picture is going to be here longer than the artist and his generation, if it's taken care of.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:23.740
Now one of the things that has happened out of your work, as you say, is the increased public awareness of what goes on in the institutions and as you say, outside of the institutions. The other thing that emerges is that this art activity seems to be a tremendous resource for helping the offender to re-integrate into society because of some of the things that you and your group have done... have reached out far beyond just their own personal rehabilitation. For example, earlier you said that one of your main purposes in working with young people is to keep them out of the institutions, which is ... take that over.

James Neal 00:12:02.210
Right. Well, see we started a class. The class is free. It's free. Like when we have the supplies we use them, when we don't have them, we go out and we solicit them. The class is free. The children run from age 8 to 16. The slogan is "let your pencil do the talking," here. And we find that by the class being free, by being out of school, that the children are more perceptive. Otherwise, it's more of a workshop; but it is a class.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:42.860
Now where are all these classes held? And how can people get into them?

James Neal 00:12:46.380
These classes are held at the National Artists Coalition, second office. We have we have two branches. We hope to open up a third one in the gallery. And this is located in the United Black Association building, 68 East 131st Street. And you could get in contact with myself or any of the other artists there by calling 281- 6000, ext. 33 or 35 anytime between nine and six at night.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:21.540
All right. I think that's important. And later in the program, we'll mention that number again, because the things that you're doing, I know a number of people in the audience are interested in themselves and helping out, which we'll talk about later, or actually, a number of young people would like to get into this. But let's turn to talk about themes -- we're talking with James Neal of the National Artists Coalition tonight -- about what is happening in Black art. And we've talked about the purposes of the organization and how growing out of a group of ex-offenders, you're reaching out into the Black community and into the larger community of New York City dealing with art. But let's talk now not only about training. How do you get artists into this? What are the artists do after they get training? What are some of the themes that are emerging among Black artists? And you might want to relate that to something you had said earlier before the program as to what Black artists are trying to do today.

James Neal 00:14:15.090
Right. I find that the majority of the Black artists or the majority of the artists that are classified as Black artists, once they get established, they have a tendency to get away from Black art. Otherwise...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:34.051
That's interesting. Now, I want to hear that. That is very interesting; you say once Black artists get established, some of them, they get away from Black art. Which then brings me back to ask you, what do you mean by Black art?

James Neal 00:14:48.570
Now, what I mean by Black art is this: Black art is an expression of a person that happens to be Black. And he paints what is in his environment. Otherwise, it's like assimilation through association. It's all ecology, because if you was born and raised in the country, then your art would deal with the country. But if you was born and raised in the urban environment, your art will be dealing with the urban environment. But I find that Black artists, once they get established, they, for some reason, start to feel insecure and they stop painting Black art. They start painting anything that is not religious, racial or might have militant overtones, or might be classified as anything other than a natural art; or they would paint like landscapes, seascapes. This is a natural art. This here is a act of nature. They are copying nature instead of their environment.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:02.180
Now, of course, this is a question that artists have some differences of opinion about. Some artists say that in painting and in creating, you create whatever you feel. And as you said very well earlier, what you feel is what you experience in your environment. Is it possible that as artists begin to develop, Black or white, they begin to move away from their immediate close environment into a larger type of universal environment, dealing with nature and feeling and things of this type, rather than what is often called the art of the real. Reality or political art? And how do you deal with that? Because it's certainly true that the artist is expressing his environment and his feelings. On the other hand, I've talked with some artists who are Black, and they say, well, why should I always have to paint about the oppression and the sufferings that I felt when I feel other things as well. Now, how do you deal with that particular conflict?

James Neal 00:17:11.800
Well, let me put it to you like this: like I mentioned before that we took a poll, an average Black person can't name a Black artist, [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:21.550.9999999998836
[CROSSTALK] Not an average, 99 out of 100.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:24.69.99999999988358
[CROSSTALK] The average white person can't name one famous Black artist. But at the same time, the majority of the art buyers are white. And for some reason, they are not going to buy a Black child picture, or portrait, in the ghetto unless it's done by a famous artist. So what happens is the Black artist in order to get his price, in order to build up a clientele so he can survive, he will paint abstract art or, like I say, he will deal with natural art. He might not want to paint this, but this is what he'll paint because the clientele or the general public will accept this quicker than they will accept, more or less, art dealing with like. Well, Ossawa Tanner. Henry Ossawa Tanner, a banjo player. Here's a man that... father was a slave. He was a preacher; but he was living in slavery days; and he painted Black art. But it wasn't accepted because people didn't want to see this. They... you know, once people are established, they sort of run into assimilation through association thing. They run into, more or less, ego tripping. They feel like bourgeois isn't a state of mind, but is an income bracket. When it is really a state of mind. So to keep they friends from saying anything that might not go along with that general environment that they're in, they will buy something that will not have any overtones on it, any kind of overtones.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:28.670
Of course it says two things: it says on one hand, if the reason why some artists who are Black move away from dealing with the Black experience, it's because mostly art is bought by white people; it says one thing that Black people ought to do is to buy some art. And I think there are some developments along those lines. And on one of our recent programs, we had Linda Bryant, who's opening a studio on West 57 Street just above Midtown Gallery, which will attempt to do this, provide the art of Blacks so that they can be bought and sold and as you say, legitimate Black art, and hopefully many Blacks will will buy art of Black artists. But of course, the other thing that I think what you raise brings up, and that is how does an artist maintain integrity with himself or with herself in a society in which economics play such an important role, and in a society where politics themselves shift? I think it is really interesting to note that many of the militants of the late 60s, if you contrasted what they're saying now in their speeches and what they said then, you have a considerably different picture. Certainly things have changed somewhat, but they probably haven't changed that much. Is it just the fact that as one sees the complexity of the social problems, they tend to see them in less simplistic terms? Or is it because, as you say, in a sense, they get co-opted, they get swept up by the system? And if that's the case -- one of the questions I want to ask you then -- is when you, and you will, and your group become recognized, how will you avoid being co-opted?

James Neal 00:21:14.830
Well, personally dealing, I think I could speak for mostly members of my organization, Black.

James Neal 00:21:25.720
It's all in your awareness and it's all in your integrity. Otherwise, a person have to have a law for what they are doing in order not to switch. Strange's is just like. Daniel Webster sold this soul to the devil know, not otherwise when the devil came to collect, you didn't want to give it up. And that this is the same thing that's happening. And all your life, people had a tendency to stop looking at they once lifetime goals and start looking at the dollar bill and the dollar bill could become counterfeit. It happened during the civil war. It happens and in every war when Agresto takes over. So what we dealing with? We'll deal with not just, you know, the survival of Black art because Black art always be here as long as as a person can. Or you are like looking to a self, looking to a mine, looking to the environment, looking to the heritage. It will always be here because the only way they go and know about their heritage is through art.

James Neal 00:22:50.000
Because I have to say that being a devotee of Black music, I think that Black music helps us to know something about our heritage, too. And in a sense, we're talking about art forms. But let's look at the the themes, the content of today's Black art. It deals with oppression. It deals with love. It deals with the awareness of our heritage. To what extent can an artist really create effectively when he starts out emphasizing a political theme first and then tries to fit the art of the theme? Or does he start out to create in his artistic medium?

James Neal 00:23:36.890
And because this socio political world that he lives in is so much a part of him. This jumps out. I've seen some of your work and I know you have some socio political themes in your work.

James Neal 00:23:48.290
Now, did you think of the theme first and create the work or did you create the work? And the theme just emerged around the work. Most of my work, I usually do a considerable amount of research on and I find the way I go about expressing my work is to be aware of the period of time in which I'm living because I feel like each picture, our pain is going to be here. You're at least a thousand years in a thousand years from now. I want the people to know what was going on nor in nineteen seventy four. And the only way I could show people a thousand years from now what happened now is to paint what is going on now. Otherwise, if this is a change in the times, then I will paint that change. I'm not going paint to pass and I'm not going paint the future. I'm going paint the now. So in doing that, you prefer to paint people, men, women, children. You prefer to paint scenes, street scenes, country scenes or semi abstracts about the political situation. How do you then make that kind of decision? That's that's that's a hard question to answer. And, of course, I'm asking you to do something that's very difficult. You work with with your brush and your palate. I'm asking you to put into words what comes from your mind and your heart and your fingers. Right. Well, I paint in such a way that I can express. To the best of my ability and make it as simplified as possible. What people were doing. Like I have I have a painting tied to a child's dream. Now, this this is a landscape well for Chao face superimposed and to the sky. Now, anybody see it and look at the title. They know what's happening. They know otherwise. That this child is out there thinking about owning this land or own this land or wondering why he don't own this land. But the message is there. The land is there and the child is there. The way the way I usually go about it is Bambi teaching children. I ask the challenge of what do they lack? I'll be compensating with doing this. They told me while they saw a picture and they didn't like it, I say, well, why? And I find that they, you know, more or less inspires me to paint them and to paint what they see.

James Neal 00:27:00.280
Of course, you're describing a truism of the artist, namely that his work grows out of his experience. And despite the fact that you have emphasized very clearly the socio political nature and purpose of art, particularly for Black artists, you are coming back to that truism that the artist does come and express himself from his experience. But as we come to the close of our program, again, would you say for the audience where people in the public who might want to support your program or might want to have young people come forward?

James Neal 00:27:33.790
Work can come on to the national artists called Loose Coalition, located 68 east to 134 Street and all donations. We would appreciate made out to the National Arts Coalition and sent to the various address 61, 60, 80, a 100 east.

James Neal 00:27:52.930
One hundred and thirty first street. All right.

James Neal 00:27:55.240
I'd like to thank you, Jim, for being our program tonight. James Neal of the National Artists Coalition. Thank you again, Jeff. Thank you.

Speaker 3 00:28:03.820
You've been listening to Soul of Reason with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. Soul of Reason is produced by the W. NBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

