Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:00:01.740
"Realidad", "Soul", "Black Journal", "Black Arts". Why do these minority oriented programs have to fight for their existence on television? Umberto Cintron of "Realidad" will talk about the problems faced by minority television programs on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:38.950
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason " is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:01:05.920
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" is Umberto Cintron of Realidad, which is on Channel 13 public television in New York. Glad to have you with us tonight Umberto

Radio Bumper Outro 00:01:15.222
Thank you.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:01:16.030
Could you tell us then about this idea that we have been thinking about, namely that minority oriented television programs seem to have problems in terms of getting produced, getting support. But as we think about that let's look also at the impact that these programs have on the communities that they're intended to relate to. In the case of "Realidad, relating to the Puerto Rican community, just as "Black Arts", a Black journal, relates to the Black community. So could you sort of explore how these programs are received by the Puerto Rican community and then tease out some of the problems that they face?

Umberto Cintron 00:01:58.240
Yeah, I think first of all the problem. Before we can even talk about the reception we have to talk about the problem. And that is that the whole historical history of racist and and bigotry in this country which which finds its way into the public access to the airwaves. I would say that the the minority communities in America are are hungry for programming and they haven't had it. We, certainly the Spanish speaking community, in New York City, the Puerto Rican community in general, and in specific, has not had any television programming of any consequence. We're hungry for program. The response has been fantastic to our show we get droves of letters, not only by the way from the Spanish speaking community, but from the non Spanish speaking community as well.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:02:55.720
Someone I think told me when I was talking about the show said you get more mail from the non- Spanish speaking community than from the Spanish speaking community.

Umberto Cintron 00:03:02.801
Yeah. The other thing that's important is if you check the rating. You know there are people who rate programs and find out who's watching and how many people are watching in order to make some determination whether to maintain programs or not. Well, the ratings are never able to reach the Spanish speaking because they're just not geared for it. They've never prepared rating schedules and sheets that talked to the Spanish speaking community. Yet our ratings have been comparable to and competitive with any other program that Channel 13 puts on the air. So we know, we know that we're not only reaching the Spanish speaking community but we're also reaching the English speaking community

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:03:44.561
Because one of the problems is that unfortunately a public television channel, 13 in particular, as good as it is still has a hard way to go with commercial TV and soap operas and cowboy shows and detective stories. And things that tend to be cerebral, cause people to think, or to relate to their culture, tend to get ignored by the commercial channels. And then because of the tremendous advertising etc. the public channels do not seem to get the play in general. But you're right, the ratings on the Black shows as well have showed that they have measured up to the general level of what the station tends to get. Which raises another question in addition to the number of people who they get in their panel that they survey, there probably are considerable number of Blacks and Puerto Ricans who are not on that panel who do watch the show and don't even get counted.

Umberto Cintron 00:04:41.330
Right. Absolutely. We know that our community is watching and we also know that by any frame of measurement reference they're not being counted. So we have two audiences we have the audience we know we have as measured by the response and by our just general feeling community as well as the audience that they are measuring.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:05:05.771
Now what about this idea of specialized programming because some specialists and media, generally majority group people, say that you don't really need a program that orients specifically to the Puerto Rican or the Spanish community or that orients specifically to the Black community? That you can have things that relate to Blacks or Hispanics on all programs, and you don't need a program that targets on that: "Realidad", "Soul", "Black Arts" "Black Journal".

Umberto Cintron 00:05:35.951
l think it's a false premise. Our premise is that our program is for our community, it's about our community, and it's by our community. I don't believe that if you look into the history of the image that's being portrayed of Spanish speaking, and certainly of Puerto Rican people, in the media that you can come anywhere near what we're trying to do or say The distorted views of our community as shown in the movies and the "West Side Story" and "Badge 373". In all kinds of television programming that that basically talks to stereotypes doesn't do any in-depth analysis of anything that they put on that relates to Spanish speaking people. You have the great objection to that Frito Bandido commercial.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:06:23.531
And they should.

Umberto Cintron 00:06:29.441
The Chicano Community raised a storm about it. It's just the distorted view of the world on the part of white America and I think first of all we serve white America by clearing up those distorted views. And secondly, we serve our community with positive images of ourselves of the concerns that we have of the issues that are before us of our perceptions of the world. And it's necessary for us to do that. I think you know I think back on my history as I grew up as a child and and the kind of insecurity that I lived with when I thought that I as a as a Puerto Rican didn't measure up to people, that I was supposed to be something other than what I was. Those were all the positive values. Well that's that's sheer nonsense, and I'm glad that through my experience I've come to realize that ,and that's what I want to share with my community. That is it that our values are in many ways superior. Certainly in terms of race relations superior to anything in this nation and a variety of other ways that what we are is equal to and very often superior to anything that we see in this society. And that's the way we should present ourselves those are the views that our community ought to see of themselves. I don't think that what we call the Iben Benito syndrome that is that the hat in hand, bowed head image of of the Spanish speaking...

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:07:54.880
Spanish version of Uncle Tom.

Umberto Cintron 00:07:56.591
Yeah and and that's not we're on what we're going to present we're going to look at our community at the issues that concern us and we're going to talk about it the way we see.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:08:04.750
Now specifically could you give it a couple of examples of things you've done on the show that are aimed at both the developing a positive image in the Hispanic and Puerto Rican community of themselves and also dealing with some of the issues that relate to Hispanics.

Umberto Cintron 00:08:20.230
Yeah, yeah. We we did one particular - two, two shows that I think are very ,very significant. They're significant today. Last week the United Nations voted on an issue that has to do with the status of Puerto Rico vis-a-vis its relationship with the United States and the United the United Nations has seen a a relationship of colonialism. Now, now the the American press has not put this: You don't find it in the Times. You don't find it in the Daily News. You don't hear about it on radio and television.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:08:55.250
Might be on page 58.

Umberto Cintron 00:08:56.791
Well, I don't think we even saw it on page 58.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:08:58.341
I don't think I saw that one in the Times, but I have seen it in other parts of the press.

Umberto Cintron 00:09:02.950
The point is that that America is keeping a colony, and and doesn't want the world to know this. That's an issue which we explore. We explore the history of relationships between the United States and Puerto Rico. We thought it was an important issue to cover to discuss the the in fact the actual relationship, the lack of self-determination on the island on the part of the island government a government that's an issue that we think needed to be brought before the general public as well as before our public, because many of our people don't realize the historical sequence of events. Number one. Number two don't understand the the basic relationships where a government you know in an island has no real control over any of its own resources and so forth. The other thing had to do, again related to that struggle. was the the instances in 1950 and 1954 when revolutionary Puerto Ricans attacked the White House in one instance, and the Congress of the United States in another instance. The media has always portrayed these people as terrorists and use that kind of vernacular when they discuss these actions. I have never talked about them in political terms. I've never talked to them in terms in historical terms. They have not ever been viewed by anybody as they are viewed by us, as a reaction to or to a oppression in Puerto Rico. The press isolated those events. Did not talk about the persecution that was going on in the island, the number of Puerto Ricans who had been killed by the island government. So those are historical issues that we need to bring into perspective so that the world understands what the relationship between the Puerto Rican and the American really is. Those are two issues that we covered.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:11:01.520
Now does your show focus mainly on the Puerto Rican community or does it cover a wider range of the New York Hispanic community?

Umberto Cintron 00:11:08.860
It covers a wider range. We we concentrate primarily on the Puerto Rican because the majority of the people are Puerto Rican and number one. And number two in terms of economic and social issues the Puerto Rican as a community it's faced with the greatest and gravest difficulties in that in that situation because most immigrants in order to immigrate to this nation are required to have employment, are required to have a certain kind of economic stability before they get here.If they're Puerto Rican that's not necessary, and consequently what happens is that the Puerto Rican who's here is primarily a poor person who's trying to find his way economically in this world and consequently comes here and faces the pressures of being poor in America which is not an easy thing at all.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:11:59.770
Well the Hispanic community is divided among itself on certain issues. A key issue might be the issue of Cuba or the Dominican Republic. Now, how do you deal with that in terms of fulfilling your role of allowing various segments of the Spanish community to think about or to hear about issues? Do you deal with controversy in the sense of balancing it in terms of getting different people to make different points of view? Or do you deal with it by having one show that deals with one particular phase of the controversy and another one deals another phase of it?

Umberto Cintron 00:12:35.290
No we try to have all of our shows balanced. We we make our our point of views balanced that is we show both sides of an issue. We make clear also what we think our position ought to be editorially. We never just distort any issue and show one side of it. What we have attempted to do with our program, and which we think we have been very successful in doing, is something different than anybody else's program that is that ours is a community program. We have a committee of people who relate to our program on a regular basis. They meet they discuss topics, issues, subject matter and and make recommendations to us staff. As to what issues and what concerns we ought to be talking about on our program. And as a result of that kind of a consensus we select our shows.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:13:29.900
I was smiling really as you were talking about this and then you use the word consensus.

Umberto Cintron 00:13:35.050
Yeah.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:13:35.773
Because I think we're both aware of the fact that when you get people who have very strong opinions about various things it's very difficult to get consensus. And I was more or less projecting as a potential producer that I would hear what these groups that try to reach a consensus. But finally if I didn't I guess since the show has to go on next week I would go ahead and make my best judgment and I would surmise that's what you do. That's the reason why I was smiling.

Umberto Cintron 00:14:03.820
Well yes and no not really. We've I guess, I guess what is the best way to say it is that that the folks who have met with us have made recommendations that that kind of cross a universe of subjects. And what we do basically is that we take that that list that may include 20, 30, 40 and we we set priorities to them. And once the priorities are established that's what I follow and I'm true to that, and I've got enough respect for the people who sit around that table to to know that their judgment is at least as good as mine. In some instances better and I respect that. We we have the final decision as staff as to what to produce and how to produce it. But you know we just believe in the system of doing things that...And it has proven it's proven itself out because the concerns that have been brought before us are concerns that we've had as staff. We haven't assigned the priorities to them. We've let community assign the priorities and we follow those priorities,. The community assists us then also in developing research materials and actually help us in the production of the show so that so we've got what we consider a community show which is different than anybody else's.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:15:26.410
And that's a very good explanation because I know the typical view of people when you say consensus is you get a bunch of people in a room and you beat them down until they finally agree or some of them quit. But what you've described is is a more orderly process where by assigning priorities to a variety of things though almost everybody gets his particular concern dealt with. I also notice in viewing a show that you have cultural segments.

Umberto Cintron 00:15:52.540
Yeah. You know...

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:15:52.920
...and I would surmise that an important part of that is the development of the image as well as the communication of certain ideas.

Umberto Cintron 00:16:01.800
Yeah. We decided this year that we'd do an hour show and that we'd do a magazine. So that in each show we could fulfill as many of our goals as possible rather than try to do the half hour show we did last year with just a single issue. The magazine then helps us first of all present some cultural material. Number two do a news roundup so that we can talk to some of the issues in the news that the rest of the media doesn't cover. Number three that we would do a a feature issue feature and we'd have a panel discussion in order to make sure that that if the film was not balanced that certainly the show would be balanced by having both views on the panel. We feel it has been a successful show cause I guess the public is who needs to decide whether they're successful or not. We want to hear from our public. We ask our public to write to us. We do get a great deal of response. We we're particularly concerned in presenting cultural and entertainment things or segments which do both. That is that they're not just entertainment purely for the sense of entertainment certainly for entertainment value to point out that there is a cultural heritage that's important and it's an important segment intertwined within all the other material on our show.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:17:32.640
I think that's a good balanced way of developing a show. But how does this tie in with the problem in so many minority oriented shows have of money? That seems to be a problem, money and existence. So the earlier question is should there be specialized program or programming causes some channels to say look we don't need this show any longer and then the other is if we need it we don't need it with a lot of support. What are some of the problems and realities there?

Umberto Cintron 00:17:59.730
Let's talk about the first reality. The first reality is that up to a few years ago there was no programming that you could call specialized programming at all. I remember back in the 60's walking a picket line with the Negro Actors Guild because there were no Black performers on Broadway. No Black performers on radio or television. That has changed to some degree, but but in those changes as those changes have come about the Hispanic Spanish speaking community has been kind of left behind on that because the powers that be so to speak figure well we make one concession we do we have to continue making concessions Well yeah...

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:18:43.792
The answer is yes

Umberto Cintron 00:18:44.940
Absolutely because...

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:18:45.951
It's a balanced society.

Umberto Cintron 00:18:46.341
Right. We have to talk about whether we've got a pluralistic society and whether that's that's a goal for us to achieve. I think we're all in agreement that the melting pot has not been a successful venture. If you want to call it that. I don't think it's worked because of the traditions of bigotry of this nation. And I think that certainly with our community we're proud of who and what we are. And and if we have a history of being rejected, well then that's fine. We don't, we don't need to be accepted or melted into a melting pot. We will accept our reality and our individuality and for that reason being 20 percent of the public of the New York City and the regulations of FCC being what they are, the airwaves belong to us as well as they do to anybody else, and we should have access to them. That's the law does that it's not anything gratuitous on the part of any station. It's the law. The public should have access to the airwaves and we we demand that access.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:19:48.510
Now here's where the problem comes so frequently it's suggested that we are 20 percent of the audience therefore we should have 20 percent of the money for a specialized program. And then the other side, the executive side, says well there are areas in the general programming that deal with Hispanic Black concerns. Therefore we don't really need 20 percent for specialized programming we only need 5 percent for specialized programming. And the lines are drawn. Now how do you deal ...?

Umberto Cintron 00:20:19.501
Well, the way we resolve that very simply the fact is that there aren't any any portions of the general programming that talk to the Spanish speaking community.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:20:28.190
This is not completely true in that some shows for example, like "51st State", which attempt to deal with certain issues which involve poverty or police brutality or something like that. I mean...

Umberto Cintron 00:20:43.030
let me say...

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:20:43.460
I'm not arguing just for the sake of arguing but in terms of identifying how someone might say, "Well yeah, t here are certain things that even though it doesn't say this is a Spanish or this is a Black show, this issue is one that hits primarily on Blacks or Hispanics."

Umberto Cintron 00:20:58.900
OK. There there are two specific things that we're concerned about. We're concerned about program time and we're concerned about employment. Now there's not a Spanish speaking report on the "51st State". I would say with commercial stations including NBC. There may be a Spanish surnamed reporter but backing him up there's nobody you look on the crews, you don't have a Spanish speaking crew you watch the credit crawl across the screen and you find out that there has been no Spanish speaking person associated with the show, no writers, no producers, no technicians ,no engineers, possibly a guy sweeping, and maybe two guys in the mailroom. That's really affirmative action quota. [crosstalk] Yeah, that's the affirmative action quota and that's the programming. Well, that's not satisfactory. There needs to be programming that needs to be programming that's written by Puerto Ricans that's produced by Puerto Ricans it's directed by Puerto Ricans.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:21:48.000
And other Hispanics

Umberto Cintron 00:21:49.210
And other Hispanics.The reason I mentioned that is that when you get this 20 percent figure whereas a majority of that figure is Puerto Rican there are other Hispanics that I know because we know.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:21:59.830
Oh yeah. So some other Spanish. [crosstalk]

Umberto Cintron 00:22:01.570
Let me just talk to that too because in our entertainment segments and various of our situations we have included our Dominican community part of our community our community committees representative of Dominicans, Cubans, South Americans. Our staff is is well integrated with Hispanics from Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Cuba, Dominican Republic ,Panama primarily Puerto Rican.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:22:26.690
But...

Umberto Cintron 00:22:27.471
And I I use Puerto Rican because I'm Puerto Rican and it's like it's...

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:22:32.241
When Blacks in Puerto Rico were fighting for something and all of a sudden we thought talked about we talked about Blacks and we neglected to mention the Puerto Ricans even though it's a considerable part of our constituency. Very valid point.

Umberto Cintron 00:22:43.510
Yeah. Let me you know let me get to that real key issue. There were ten years of public television and public television of course more than commercial television needs to and is required to respond to community because not only because of the FCC regulations but also because the funds that support that stations use our public funds. It's governmental money. It's my money. It's your money. It's tax money that belongs to the public. The airwaves belong to the public. For 10 years there was no Spanish speaking programming at all. There was no programming that dealt with the Spanish speaking community. A few segments of the "51st State" did and they hired two people on their staff at that time as assistants, two assistants. Well I don't think that's valid. I don't think that that the major networks: CBS, NBC, ABC have sufficient Spanish speaking representation. I don't think that any TV across the nation has enough Spanish speaking representation either in its programming or in its, in its employment practices. I don't think "The New York Times", the "Daily News", the "New York Post", the three major papers in New York cover enough of the Spanish speaking community. If anything they they go to Police Blotter and they find you 16 criminals who are who are minorities but they won't go to the positive aspects of the community, the positive things that people do. They won't hire. There's maybe one reporter at " The Times" that's Al Narvaez, and there's not another reporter. Now an organization as large as "The Times" ought to be able to find all the Spanish speaking reporters. Likewise the "Daily News" with the amount of money that those guys gross and take home particularly from the Spanish speaking community they ought to have more than Rudy Garcia as a reporter. That's the reality of what we're concerned with and we're not only concerned with with Channel 13, certainly Channel 13 because it's public, with the entire media. The media has not been responsive it has not fulfilled its moral or its legal obligations to our community and we're angry about it, as simple as that.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:24:43.030
Well let's say you, Umberto Cintron,who was involved in this and has been very active, how do you see this being changed? What courses of action do you think might be taken? And what specific things would you and those that you work with want to see happen?

Umberto Cintron 00:24:59.770
Oh well there's a lot of things. We're entering negotiations with all of the stations.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:25:03.631
We being?

Umberto Cintron 00:25:04.960
We being the Puerto Rican Media Action and Educational Council, and the National Latino Media Coalition. We will be entering into negotiations. We will be challenging licenses when licenses come up in '75. We're preparing surveys right now. We are as matter of fact this afternoon I'll be meeting with some folks at CBS to try to arrange increased employment and increased programming. We'll be meeting with folks here at NBC to do the same thing. And we will be challenging. We will we will challenge legally. We'll go to the courts. We'll challenge through public opinion. We will challenge through trustees who members of the board who will assert every and any kind of pressure that we think is necessary to have people open their eyes and fulfill their responsibilities.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:25:54.090
Have you thought about, I'm sure you thought about it, but have you developed any relationships with Black Citizens For a Fair Media? Because they have had some success in doing this in regard to Blacks and in many instances have related it to other minorities.

Umberto Cintron 00:26:06.480
Yeah we do we've met with Emmett Bowen and sometime in the past and we we have maintained communication with him. We've also maintained communication with the Chicano community in the far west, the Midwest, and the Southwest and formed the National Organization. So so we we have a local organization as well as a national organization. We made presentations jointly with the with the Black community before the FCC, and we made an individual presentation before the FCC as a Latino Coalition We'll follow every and any means. We'll be nice about it and we don't have to be nice about it. I think that the general public has got to realize that the people who control the airways need to make the access to the airwaves available to the rest of the community and particularly to the Hispanic community that has so little access to it.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:27:01.320
And of course the thing that is very important at this as this press for fairness to Blacks and Chicanos Puerto Ricans. Other minorities develops that it doesn't take away from one to give to the other. I think the point that you made very clearly is that the large percentage of minority people let's say in the New York metropolitan area, 35 or 40 percent, certainly suggest that you don't have to just give a thin ribbon of time to one group and a thin ribbon of time to the other group in order to have fair media.

Umberto Cintron 00:27:31.270
No.no that's that's absolutely true. I've worked very closely with the Black community for many years and a whole variety of areas, the media being one of them. But certainly the the inequality that's expressed over the airwaves is it's just clear it's just clear, and I see no defense against it and no reason for it. And consequently we have got to continue our efforts in behalf of our community.

Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:28:05.220
I think that's a beautiful summary and I'd like to thank you Umberto Cintron of Realidad for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason"

Umberto Cintron 00:28:11.790
Thank you for having me.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:13.440
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason"with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

