Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.320
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that tells what's happening in Black America. Each week on NBC, leaders and movers in the Black community visit "Soul of Reason" to discuss important issues of concern to Black New Yorkers. I'm your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Adjunct Professor of Education at New York University and President of Bronx Community College of the City University of New York. And with us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Vy Higginsen who is the founder and publisher of an excellent creative magazine, "Unique NY." And Vy, we're glad to have you with us this evening.

Vy Higginsen 00:00:33.010
It's a pleasure to be here, Roscoe.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:35.461
Many of the folks in the audience know you because of your work as a radio personality with WBLS. But more and more people are knowing you—are learning about you and admiring you—as a publisher of this really interesting magazine, "Unique New York." So maybe you can begin by telling our audience exactly what led you to create the magazine and how you're trying to carry out this dream of yours.

Vy Higginsen 00:01:06.210
Actually, the magazine came about as a result of being on the radio at WBLS. I spent four years there and I began to get a lot of questions from the audience. They would ask things about, "Where can I go here?" "I heard this ad last week about a new restaurant and I didn't write the address down—where is it?" Things, questions like that or, "Today is my girlfriend's birthday and I want to go to a really intimate place I can hear some good music," and things like that. And as the questions continued to come I realized that there was no one source that had that kind of information for a large growing audience. So I began—and I was often embarrassed because I couldn't answer the question—so I began to compile the information about new restaurants, discotheques, and stuff for myself and began to give it out to my friends. And they began to feel so valued—so valuable—that we we put it down in the form of a magazine that you see now before you. We wanted it to be a guide, so to speak. And we started in November of 1974—as a matter of fact, this month marks our third anniversary and we're kind of proud of that because, often you see magazines come out in one or two or three issues and you never see them again.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:22.260
That's a particularly fantastic accomplishment for a Black magazine. I think the one thing you didn't say—although, since most of our audience probably is aware of the fact that we deal with Black community—is that what you're really talking about is identification of ideas and places and things that particularly appeal to Blacks—not that whites might not be interested—but suddenly it really appeals to what might be called the lifestyle and the interest of Blacks. And I believe you have a term—what do you call it?—the "now generation?" Or whatever that is now. 'Course every time I talk with you, you're expanding the age level on that. What's the age level of this generation that you're talking in your magazine toward?

Vy Higginsen 00:03:04.510
Oh well, we talk about the boom generation. I'm particularly interested in that generation because it's those people born between 1942 and 1957—of course that was the time when the most people were born in the history of America and that'll probably remain true—but that generation has experienced a lot of things together including television and advertising, Madison Avenue, and those kinds of things. And so we've grown into a different kind of person with different kinds of needs, and many of us—especially in the Black community—didn't suffer the same kinds of things our parents did. And we find ourselves in jobs that our parents never held and in a lifestyle that, you know, may be different from anything else any of our other generations have experienced. So, that is one of the reasons why we particularly gear this magazine toward that group of people—because it's a new group and because that group refuses to be ignored. I mean, it's a very daring, bold group and they want to be recognized, and that's what "Unique NY" does. Matter of fact, I think the best way to describe "Unique NY" is to say it's a "who's who, what's what" kind of thing, 'cause it fills you in on other people who are doing things who are movers and shakers, so to speak, and places that they frequent.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:31.550
I notice you have on a caption of the latest issue—the December issue—"the new entertainment and lifestyle magazine."

Vy Higginsen 00:04:38.850
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:39.353
And I guess that sort of capsulizes what you're trying to do with the magazine. Also, for those who haven't seen the magazine, it has an interesting format. It's about, what, four and a half to five inches wide and about 11 inches long?

Vy Higginsen 00:04:54.272
Four and a half by nine and three quarters!

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:56.450
And the idea I guess is that it can be shoved in your pocket...

Vy Higginsen 00:04:59.991
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:00.591
... or your bag, or what have you?

Vy Higginsen 00:05:02.242
It's meant to be handy but I might, I might add that, with our next issue, we will be changing our size. We find we have a lot more information—when we first started, you know, there's nobody—you can't fill, there's not enough going on in the Black—and it's not true. We get—every day we get more and more information about people who are tucked away in little places and, you know, so we're changing our size in January— January, February is going to be larger.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:28.151
It's good. What type of size will it be? Will it be eight and half by eleven?

Vy Higginsen 00:05:31.620
No.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:32.271
"Time" magazine or "Jet" magazine or "Reader's Digest" size?

Vy Higginsen 00:05:36.080
Well we refuse we, we insist on being unique—

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:38.354
I understand your product identification, but certainly the audience can get an idea?

Vy Higginsen 00:05:43.860
We're toying with two sizes at this point, we haven't finalized. As a matter of fact, this afternoon we will finalize the exact size. It's going to be somewhere in the neighborhood of five and a half by eight and a half or seven by 10: one of the two.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:58.310
I see, and speaking of your expansion or your change, I believe your company is going through some changes in terms of your stockholders and the people who are interested in it.

Vy Higginsen 00:06:10.701
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:11.761
And this is very important in the magazine business because it's a very difficult, competitive business.

Vy Higginsen 00:06:17.150
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:17.571
And the more resources you have the more you can do.

Vy Higginsen 00:06:19.791
Yes, that's true.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:20.600
So, in terms of this, who are some of the people who are supporting you, working with you, both from the stockholders' point of view and also from the staff point of view?

Vy Higginsen 00:06:33.170
Well, as a matter of fact, we've just acquired some new stockholders and those stockholders own a communications business. They are the Inner City Broadcasting Group which is WBLS and WLIB. And they believe in what we're doing and, as a matter of fact, we really address a similar audience. And so, they're newly, new involvement with the magazine. We look forward to that association because it has many good qualities.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:02.930
What about your staff?

Vy Higginsen 00:07:03.970
Oh we've got great staff!

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:04.241
Has this enabled you to to increase your staff? Or, who are some of the staff people? How do you work? How does one get to work for [stumbles] "Unique NY," for example?

Vy Higginsen 00:07:13.820
It is a tongue twister. I have a rather dedicated staff. I started out with a young lady who was a journalism major at Hunter College and she started working for me part time working her way through school. And when we—I can see the idea, she was there working with me—and she's been there for the three years—actually, a total of four—and she is now the managing editor of the publication. She knows it inside and out. Her name is Deborah Singletary. And I also have another gentleman who is the operations manager who was working in the computer field, although he was a graduate of NYU and the School of Journalism and had a Master's degree in business. So we combined those efforts and we put it together for the Operations Director who is Ernest Swiggett. And we also have another young lady who has a degree in journalism as well—a Master's degree in journalism. Her name is Lynn Sharpe and she's just joined our staff as an Associate Editor. Joyce Griffin has joined our staff now as the Public Relations Director. We have a whole host of people who are out in the field—writers, photographers, illustrators, and creative people—who are the eyes for us, in many cases, who go out and dig up the information, dig up the new ideas, wherever they are—in Queens, in Brooklyn, and in the Bronx—and they come back, often with good story ideas or we will give them, you know, assignments to cover. And these often are people who are working journalists as well as people who are writers, and people who might not—under normal circumstances—get an opportunity to have their work received by the general public.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:02.050
I've noticed in reading magazine that you have a number of articles and, fortunately for the busy person, they are short—dealing with things like jewelry and books and art, sewing and decorating apartments, places to eat, shows to see—which really identifies the need for having a lot of people out there...

Vy Higginsen 00:09:30.861
Looking around.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:31.224
... looking around. Now, about your circulation–

Vy Higginsen 00:09:34.910
Roscoe, you did–I just want to interject here. You did mention something very important: our magazine is really designed for the New Yorker.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:44.541
It's not a national magazine.

Vy Higginsen 00:09:46.401
Not at this point, although we will be expanding to Philadelphia and Washington, and other areas with similar type publications. But, it is designed for the busy New Yorker in that, we know people don't get an opportunity to read and we are a visual generation, very often an audio generation. So we try to be as convenient as possible and the articles are short, just so you can get all the information you need because we want to grab it and run, so to speak. So you can, you know, fill in the day. And that's part of the reason why we will probably remain a unique size, so that you can continue to get all the information you need in a very short space.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:24.120
Now in terms of your circulation: how are you coming on? About how many people read the magazine, both on the first go round and on the pass along?

Vy Higginsen 00:10:33.160
You know, it's rather interesting 'cause we've had a 600 percent increase in circulation from our inception. We started out with a 5000 circulation. We are now at 30000 circulation. One third of our circulation is on the newsstand, the other two thirds are by... I'm sorry, one third is by subscription. The other two thirds is on the newsstand.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:57.981
And that's unusual because, for magazines to really make it, generally it's felt that much of their sales would be through subscriptions. And of course the main thing that pays for magazines is advertising—which is the next question I'm going to ask you—but me, personally, I have some experience because, at New York University we have run a quarterly review of Black arts and letters called "Black Creation," which was really sort of a both popular and scholarly publication evaluating dance, music, drama, etc. And at various times it was necessary to—instead of having one issue, we'd have an issue every quarter, there would have to be a yearly issue, and so on. I believe that right now the Institute of of Afro-American Affairs is trying to recreate "Black Creation," as it were. But, having gone through that experience, I personally am very aware of the problem of developing and conducting a magazine. And one of the main problems with it has to do with getting enough advertising to take care of the cost of producing the magazine. I understand that, for some of the larger magazines—like "Life" and "Ebony" and "Time" and so on—the cost of producing the magazine is actually more than the cost that you pay for it on the stand which then suggests the great need for advertising. Now in your instance, you have a magazine which is a probably a low cost magazine to produce because both its format and size. But also, you have expenses. It's a business. And you have two thirds of your circulation coming from the newsstand.

Vy Higginsen 00:12:38.360
Let me explain that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:39.511
So how do you make it? That's really what we want to know, 'cause I think other people who are thinking about magazines want to know: how does one really keep this thing going? Because there's a lot of creative talent out there in the Black community that it's interested in publications and journalism.

Vy Higginsen 00:12:53.250
Well, I think one of the things that has to be recognized is that, you know, with the cost of mailing being as it is, that you don't really make any money off the subscription aspect. You do make your money on the newsstand sales. That's where the money is.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:09.151
No, the money is in advertising–

Vy Higginsen 00:13:10.341
Well, well–

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:11.930
In between you make money.

Vy Higginsen 00:13:12.235
Well in the subscription area–in terms of circulation area–you know, you would tend to make more money on the news–on the newsstand–than you would by subscription.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:18.770
Of course, part of this has to do with the fact that you can build up—that's the reason why they practically give subscriptions away—you build up your circulation, you can increase your ad rates.

Vy Higginsen 00:13:28.111
Oh yeah, that of course is a fact. I mean advertising is absolutely key. You have to have advertising in order to survive—

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:34.170
I saw one magazine—

Vy Higginsen 00:13:35.430
... in the magazine business.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:35.435
... which right now should remain nameless, which is a very popular magazine. It's a dollar an issue on the stands and they're giving away a year subscription for 13 dollars.

Vy Higginsen 00:13:45.071
Yeah.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:45.911
You know, it's a promotion and the obvious reason for it is that, if they can increase their subscriptions by a hundred thousand or so, they can increase their advertising rates accordingly. Now you have the particular problem of having a magazine that has sort of a different perspective. It's local in a sense and it focuses primarily the Black community. And I know that Black publications, other than a few like "Essence" and "Ebony" magazine have difficulty getting ads from the various businesses and concerns that advertise in the Black community. Now how are you making out on that? What kind of ads are you attracting? What type of response are you getting to the attempt to sell advertising?

Vy Higginsen 00:14:35.691
You know, it's it's a whole reeducation process that has to take place between the Black community and Madison Avenue. It is one where, for example, if I go in as a sales person—or any of my staff—would have to really acquaint that person who's in a position to select the advertising or spend the advertising dollars in a publication. Because very often that person sitting behind that desk has no idea about who you're talking about. For example, we've mentioned the boom generation and the various needs of that generation. And, in order for me to even begin to sell my publication, I have to explain that generation. I have to also talk in terms of how important a New York market is to a client's dollars and cents—or profit margin. It's a very difficult sale because, as you know, we live in that kind of society. It's a difficult sale because the people who make the decisions have yet to recognize the power of the audience. And the audience in many cases have yet to recognize their own power. We talk about a 80 billion dollar Black consumer market. That means a lot of, that's a lot of cornflakes, you know, that's a lot of liquor, that's a lot of cigarettes and so forth and so on. And it's an awakening process. And it's one that both will have to come to, and soon, I think. It's the only market that has not fully been explored. When you think about all the various other kinds of publications on the market that are selling and that get advertising—we talk about roller skating magazines, skateboard magazines, we talk about all kinds of things, "The New Republic"—all get advertising and that whole entire spectrum. Now I think there's about 10000 white and other publications on the market, there's only eight Black public–and national Black publications. And the local market is extremely important to an advertiser, especially a New York market. This is the largest Black community in the country. So that kind of education process has got to take place and they have got to realize the importance of the New York Black dollar and the New York Black person.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:59.761
Okay you've convinced me, only problem is I don't have any advertising to give you.

Vy Higginsen 00:17:03.750
Shucks!

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:03.752
[laughs] Tonight on "Soul of Reason" we are talking with Vy Higginsen who is the founder and publisher of "Unique NY" magazine and we are talking about the things that are happening with the magazine—a magazine that appeals to the lifestyles of Black New Yorkers and white New Yorkers and other people who are in what Vy chooses to call the "boom generation." So, speaking about the boom generation and what you're trying to do, certainly what is happening in the magazine deals with lifestyle: it deals with jewelry, it deals with painting, it deals with reading, it deals with music. Do you plan to—or is it possible in the magazine to deal with some of the social issues that impinge on the boom generation? I know that's a hard problem—particularly when you have a magazine that has a limited space—and then you have an advertising problem because, one of the things we know is that, if magazines get to be too serious around the issues surrounding racism in society, this further turns off advertisers. So what have you been thinking about that? Are you going to have a feature each month on some social issue? Or are you going to allow the art that you cover to be art that are relevant to social issues? Have you given any—I'm sure you thought to it, but—what have you decided to do about it? And I know I'm asking hard questions.

Vy Higginsen 00:18:23.560
Well, I kind of decided to make the magazine in its present format successful and then publish another magazine.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:33.610
That's a good idea.

Vy Higginsen 00:18:33.614
[laughs] Because that's a whole new ball of wax, it's a whole new new area. I think the kinds of things that we do in the magazine are, you know, very often political. We try to deal with people who are really about change, who are doing things that have not been done before. We do that in the "about business" column where we pick a local businessman and explore the reasons why he's successful and why he does what he does. We do that very often in our community area, where community organizations do not get support from other publications or other places often, and their need to survive is very important. A new feature, which will be coming up in the issue, is a kind of a community bulletin board where we will talk about those people who are active in the community, doing positive things, and who are really effecting change here in New York. And then we will list those kinds of places that people can get help. And many off—in many cases, our magazine—in addition to providing a lot of answers to what's going on and who's who—we kind of supply a survival technique as well. We help people to cope better in the city. I think in this recent issue you'll find a place, there is a group of people who are winterizing windows to keep the coal out, for example. And you can avail yourself of that kind of service, and we might not know about that otherwise. So there are lots of services—lots of free things going on—in this city that Black people don't know about and cannot—and have not—taken advantage of. And that's our purpose: to present a quality publication with as much information for survival and knowhow as we can.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:27.220
And of course there is this whole area of health. I know that many things you deal with—diet, and various forms of exercise, and things like that—that you personally are very interested in.

Vy Higginsen 00:20:37.651
Oh yeah.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:38.230
And that certainly does come through in the magazine. Let's talk about Vy Higginson as a person. Just before the show you were saying that you are doing a roots exploration of the background of Vy Higginsen and the Higginsen clan. And I found it very interesting, because this really does have to do with you as a person, your family. It was the third anniversary or fourth anniversary birthday party, you had your family there, your sister who was there, a recording star—what's his name?—Darius Troy.

Vy Higginsen 00:21:14.741
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:15.431
And you talk about, you know, things that you've got from your heritage. So could you tell us a little about Vy Higginson the person? Your roots, I guess, are in Virginia and in Barbados.

Vy Higginsen 00:21:29.121
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:29.321
And that really represents a prototype of the roots of a lot of Black New Yorkers in particular—from southern Black America from the Caribbean. So how do you go about exploring your roots and what have you found?

Vy Higginsen 00:21:46.030
Well, it's interesting how it came. My grandmother, who was 97 years old, passed away about two months ago. And some people from Washington and northern Virginia came up. And that was when I first realized that it—really—the tree went a lot further than right here in New York. We were just like a little separate section here. And as we began to talk, I just became fascinated with the group, my grandmother's side of the family, which is the West family. She married Payne but her maiden name was West. And another thing that I began to find is digging into your background, you get a sense of the history of America, I mean, from another kind of standpoint. My cousin Mamie, when I asked her what part of Africa we were from, she said to me—which is why I began to dig a little further—that there's no African blood on this side of the family.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:52.651
Did she really mean it?

Vy Higginsen 00:22:53.410
And she—well, I looked at her again, I realized what she was saying, and it had never occurred to me before. And that's why I wanted to dig a little deeper, and I said, "What do you mean by that? What does that what does that mean?" And of course it's something that people don't often talk about. And she was—I had to pull teeth to get it out of her. It's a very shy kind of thing. And so I said, "What does that mean?" And I said, "What are we then?" She says, "Well, your great grandmother was an Indian." "Oh," I said, "Oh! So we're Indian." Well then she said, "Well, there are some other things in there too." And so that's how, you know, that's how it began to go back. And realizing that, it makes us–makes me—aware of the fact that there was a lot of things going on in Virginia. And, you know, there's a lot of intermixing. I think some some people—

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:46.751
Not necessarily–

Vy Higginsen 00:23:46.754
...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:46.755
use the word "miscegenation"— ... not necessarily by agreement always.

Vy Higginsen 00:23:50.380
Not necessarily by agreement.

00:23:50.386
Sometimes, but not always.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:50.386
But it also, Roscoe, brought up a reason for being, too. I think it's why a lot of people look into roots. And you realize that, you know, you have just as much right to be in America as anybody else. And all the guilt and other things that are poured on us, and various other senses, are really not true. So what we find here is that, Vy Higginsen and Higginsen clan, so to speak, is a mixture of Indian, white, and Black. And that's what I found out so far. And, you know, go back any further. But I think people tend to think of people as one lump sum, or as a group, and that's, you know fairly, unfair too.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:30.790
Well of course you talk about the boom generation, that is a generation of Blacks between 20 and 30, 35, who have experienced this remarkable—if you want to call it that—change in terms of—not necessarily the basic attitude to racism, but certainly the elements of segregation.

Vy Higginsen 00:24:53.382
Mhmm.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:53.385
It's surprising to me some time when I talk with young people—talk about people riding in the back of the bus—they really don't know what you're talking about.

Vy Higginsen 00:25:00.371
No. Not at all.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:00.375
When they talk about Black institutions, where Blacks could only go to a Black school. In my own faith, I had to walk past three white schools in order to go to a Black school. As a matter of fact, I went to the finest Black school—one of the finest high schools—in the country, which was Dunbar High School where Senator Ed Brooke and Robert Weaver and Charles Drew and a number of other very important Blacks attended. But, nonetheless, there still was that basic principle of you being separate. Now, for many of us who were Black, it had to do with struggling to be better because you were separate. For many other people—and the Supreme Court case, Kenneth Clarke's testimony, and maybe Clarke's testimony about the attitudes of Black children towards skin color in choosing Black dolls and white dolls tended to show that, for many others, it tended to cause them to lose their self image.

Vy Higginsen 00:25:48.762
Mhmm.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:48.764
And so much of what is happening now really relates to not only recognizing the heritage of Blacks and giving us a sense of importance, but also sustaining that.

Vy Higginsen 00:26:01.930
Mhmm.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:01.932
And that really is what people like Vy Higginsen and magazines like "Unique NY" happen to do. So I want to ask the question about the whole question of Blacks in media. You particularly have been active in radio somewhat, and television certainly, and publications. Yet, the thing that I still observe is that, even though there are a number of Vy Higginsens and, you know, Kenny Webbs, and Melba Tollivers around, most of them are still restricted to those media that focus on the Black community, Black radio in particular. I think there are about three Black television shows or maybe two in town, and there's always a token Black or two on the news. But in terms of the really important things that happen in the media, they are still limited mainly to the white community. What do you think you, I, and others—including members of audience—can do to help open these doors to break the stereotypes that Blacks really should be restricted to Black media?

Vy Higginsen 00:27:09.430
Respond. Respond. And, what do I mean by that? I mean pick up the pen, pick up the telephone, you know, just, you know, call—right?—do whatever is necessary to effect change. I think that's the only—that's the only tool we have at the moment short of demonstrating and bombing. I mean, and I think that that's the tool that we could use most now. There's such a strong need—you know, we talk in terms of Black radio shows and Black television shows—the Black market is a viable market. It is a strong—it needs experts in those markets and sometimes I hear people say, you know, "I don't want to only be known," you know, "as a Black advertising agency! I want to be a general market, such and such..." That's terrific, but you—the Black market is a strong and viable market and we have the need to communicate. We've been denied that right. Somebody told a lie all the way down the line, and we want to know what that lie is a why we're not able to communicate with each other the way we should, or the way other groups of people do.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:10.630
Well isn't part of that, though, due to the fact that—I sort of call it the "end of the dial syndrome," that you look at either end of the radio dial that's where the Black stations are, basically because we were sort of the last in and, in some instances, there hasn't been the power to sustain the signal and so on—isn't part of that the fact that Blacks really have been pushed into a certain stereotypic role? Shouldn't we do something to break out of that mold?

Vy Higginsen 00:28:40.330
Well I, again, I think that the thing you—we have a right to communicate with eachother. We have to know what our rights are first.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:46.421
Well it's not a right, it's a necessity.

Vy Higginsen 00:28:49.391
And without that there won't be any unification. And one of my goals is to have unity through communications and that's why I struggle so hard.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:58.580
And I think you're doing an excellent job with it. And I'd like to wish you a lot of good luck with "Unique NY." And I'm sure that we're gonna be hearing a lot of things from the magazine and from you. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Vy Higginsen, who is the founder and publisher of a very creative magazine dealing with what she calls a "boom generation" and what is the boom generation, particularly in terms of Black New Yorkers. The magazine is "Unique NY." And how might someone get in touch with you, if they want to acquire the magazine or find out something about it?

Vy Higginsen 00:29:29.950
Well, our phone number is 490-2912. We're located 155 East 42nd Street and the magazine's on the newsstands all over the city.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:29:39.770
Okay, thank you very much, Vy, for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" and good luck.

Vy Higginsen 00:29:43.811
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:29:44.981
This is Roscoe Brown saying so long for "Soul of Reason." This program is produced by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs in cooperation with NBC.

