Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:00:01.751
The Harlem Opera society was founded over 20 years ago by Monty Norris and other Harlem residents. The society gives 40 performances a year including two or three Black operas throughout the metropolitan area and the nation. Here, Emory Taylor director of the Harlem Opera Society discussed their work on tonight's 'Soul of Reason'.

Pre-recorded Introduction 00:00:41.711
This is 'Soul of Reason'. A program that will examine the roots of the black box. 'Soul of Reason' is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:01:08.680
With us this evening on 'Soul of Reason' is Emory Taylor who's director of the Harlem Opera society in Harlem USA. Glad to have you with us tonight Emory.

Emory  Taylor 00:01:16.991
Oh very happy to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:01:18.612
Well could you tell us a little something about the history of the Harlem Opera Society. How it got started, what its objectives, and what are some of its accomplishments.

Emory  Taylor 00:01:27.401
Well, people haven't talked about it very much in the last 10 years but we have a long history of classical music singing in the Afro-American Black community beginning with: Black Patty, Cissy Reddy Jones, Blind Tom the piano player who used to play classical collections. These singers were singing slaves who made money for their masters. Black Patty's troubadours toured the nation and the world and Black Patty used to sing operatic arias in the midst of other types of minstrel acts. Down through the years we've always had black singers singing. In Harlem, these black singers who had studied voice and everything decided they wanted their own opera society to learn the roles and work them out and they formed the Harlem Opera Society. It's significant that the Harlem Opera Society that has always been interracial. There are at least two white singers now at the Metropolitan Opera who performed 15 years ago with the Harlem Opera Society. Now we have more black members than we have white, but it's still an interracial company. My musical director Fred Stauffer is white though. We now have a composer in residence, Sam Rivers, the great jazz musician who has done two jazz operas for us.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:02:50.531
And it's very interesting that you mentioned his jazz operas because some people say that the operatic experience is the European experience and it's not particularly relevant. Whatever that particular cliché means to the Black community and the Black people really shouldn't be spending time going around singing Italian opera Ari arias and imitating white people strutting around on stages. What do you think about that? Certainly Opera is an art form and certainly Black people like any group of people can relate to any art form. But specifically, how do you deal with the question of the relevance of opera to Black people to the Black community?

Emory  Taylor 00:03:32.510
Well I'd like to think of another word with a Latin root that blacks didn't give up and that's drama. When we had the militant movement in the 60's Blacks still performed Black plays and they said they would you know- they were dramatic artists. They didn't give up the Latin word for drama for theater. We haven't given up the word for opera which is a word that expresses a particular type of performance -not the subject matter- but the way you perform. We know what a play is. We know what an opera is, so it's the word itself is unimportant. What is important is the content matter of what goes on on stage. We know that we've turned Black drama into something significant. What happened is the Black opera people were very much caught up in the European operatic experience. It just so happens this coming season on Broadway, the Scott Joplin's treatment issue is coming in. Scott Joplin never was able to get it performed. When people listen to that they'll be struck with the fact that Scott Joplin was not writing his jazz that he normally wrote and he was trying to write something a bit far into him. When I listen to music, I keep thinking he should have wrote more rags into Treemonisha than are actually in it. With Sam Rivers our resident composer, we're trying to write operas that come out of the Black tradition out of the Black jazz tradition. Jazz is improvisation. When we started with Solomon and Sheba we wrote absolutely no notes down. We call out chord changes to ourselves and we call out situations for ourselves the same way jazz musicians do on stage and perform the opera. That's why we say it was the first true truly jazz opera ever performed in the United States because improvisation is the basis of jazz and it was an improvised opera. Now because we're under management and what not we've locked ourselves into music on the sheets and in a normal structure but it retains that improvise jittery flavor. We still use chord charts and the singers can can do can. You know if we have two jazz singers two different jazz singers singing the same role they'll come out differently because as all jazz musicians put themselves into music. Our singers are given the jazz flexibility to bend the performances.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:06:01.601
Well again this relates to the purpose of the music. Many of the European operas deal with stories that today would be considered to be fairly silly. Yet, some of the songs from those operas in many areas are well-known and considered to be a test of a classical singers ability to perform. And as we know many of the great classical singers are Black people like Leontyne Price and George Shirley and Maria Arroyo and people of this type. So that the question then comes up well what really is the purpose of an opera. Is it a form to allow singers to express themselves vocally and to show the range of their voice? Or is it something it's supposed to tell a story that has some type of meaning?

Emory  Taylor 00:06:56.160
Well Opera is the original mixed media. Opera was a combination of of music instrumental music that was the Opera Orchestra. In our case, we use a jazz combo Jazz Quartet. It was the singing voice which was the vehicle for the performance that was the singing voice un-amplified. When Leontyne Price sang 'Porgy and Bess' on Broadway she didn't have microphones. She sang without a microphone. Anyone coming to hear the Harlem Opera society do its jazz operas. We'll hear singers sing without microphones. The voices are powerful enough to to fill 3,000 seat theater without amplification. That's one of the bases of opera we sing jazz. The average jazz singer's voice doesn't project he uses a microphone it as with most of the rock singers. Some of the blues singers who came up in the churches have huge voices that they don't need mics though they have performed- on big- and Big Mama Thornton- Big Big Maybelle I think her name was, she didn't need a microphone. Big Maybelle could stand in a 3,000 seat auditorium shout em down. But most of the time because it was a tradition in popular music. They put her on mic but um we as opera singers sing without mic -mics- and that shows the extent of the training of our voices.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:08:20.901
That really means in a sense it's a more refined form of the art, although I'm sure some of the multi-million dollar rock singers would necessarily agree with you on that point.

Emory  Taylor 00:08:30.501
I think they would many rock singers know that they didn't study voice and they don't really know what's going on and they have to take it down in a lower key and and and make adjustments for vocal inabilities. Whereas the opera singers have to do it and whatever key it's written in and and it's it's proof of their ability to be able to hit those notes- regardless of the fact that it's an extremely high note. Our top soprano Jeannie Faulkner sings G's above high C. She sings a fifth above high C, and one performance we counted and she actually sang 40 notes in a performance above high C which is something you just don't even hear it. Our saxophone and trumpet players used to try to sing- play duets with her during performances they would match her note for note and she blew out the trumpet player's lip many a night in that jazz fight between the voice and the instrument.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:09:29.020
Well again as you describe this and unfortunately we don't have a record of it. But as you describe this I see it as kind of an artistic contest, rather than something that's communicating a mood. And one view of art is that it communicates a mood, it communicates an interpretation of human feeling and you've been emphasizing the technical quality. So could you sort of give us some balance on that.

Speaker 7 00:09:58.160
I have to get away from the technical aspects. We-we, well on the content side Solomon Sheba is about the Queen of Sheba. Great Black Queen who established a dynasty in Ethiopia that ruled up until the insurrection. I think was two three years ago and actually Halley Selassie is still alive in Ethiopia. And who knows he may win his way back, but the Lion of Judah Haile Selassie is descended from Menelik the son of Queen of Sheba and Solomon. And we do an opera 'Solomon and Shiva' about the Queen of Sheba's going to Judea and and establishing a relationship with Solomon, having a son, and setting up her dynasty in Ethiopia and the monarchy in Ethiopia is the oldest existing monarchy in the world.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:10:50.870
And as you develop this the various songs and arias are related to some particular themes within the relationship between Solomon and Shiva?

Emory  Taylor 00:11:00.830
Yeah. Yes yes they are. The opera 'Solomon and Sheba' opens with Shiva's loneliness. She's the Queen as people high up and in the social strata where she is-she really had no one- no equal. Everyone was her subject. She wanted an equal. She wanted- She was also supposed to be a virgin queen and that was a problem for her because as long as she was a virgin queen she couldn't establish a dynasty. There would be no family continuum and she was searching. She heard about this great King Solomon and there are disputes between black historians and white historians about just exactly what Solomon's racial genealogy is with. I know many black artists believe that Solomon was black -that he had black blood in him- and she heard about King Solomon and she went to him. And the relationship between the Queen of Sheba and the King Solomon enabled her to have a son whom Solomon taught. He gave him riches, he taught him kingship, gave him armies, even offered him the throne of Judea which Menelik refused to in order to go back to Ethiopia.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:12:16.040
And this is all woven into this beautiful opera.

Emory  Taylor 00:12:18.291
Yes it is.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:12:19.160
Could you tell us something about your financial support. How is this opera company supported and how might some of our listeners assist if they would desire to do so?

Emory  Taylor 00:12:27.770
Well we are supported mainly by contributions. We've had a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts. We've had a grant from the National Opera Institute and grants from the New York State Council on the arts. The Harlem Cultural Council has been very very helpful with us during the course of our career and we perform at the Harlem Performance Center which is a theatrical facility of the Harlem Cultural Council.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:12:55.050
And where is the Harlem Performance Center located?

00:12:56.750
7th Avenue which is now called Adam Powell Boulevard between one hundred thirty seventh one hundred thirty eighth street. The telephone number there is 86 to 3000 and some of the best performances to be seen in New York City happen there year round.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:13:13.440
I see and where people desire to get into this to help you. What should they do? Should they call this number?

Emory  Taylor 00:13:20.132
They can call either the Harlem Performance Center or they can call us directly at the Harlem Opera Society 6 6 6 7 1 4 4.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:13:28.651
Could you give us that number again?

Emory  Taylor 00:13:29.790
6 6 6 7 1 4 4.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:13:33.030
I think that's very important for our guests to know because I know there are many people who really want to help organizations like the Harlem Opera Company grow and flourish and develop the type of artistic talent that exists in the Black community. We are talking this evening with Emory Taylor who is the director of the Harlem Opera society and we're talking about the role of opera in the Black community and the need for organizations like the Harlem Opera Society to be supported. Now other than generous donors who give you money and some of the arts foundations, do you make any money from any of your performances? Does this help you any? Do you have any corporate sponsors like Mobile Oil or Texaco that for years has supported the Metropolitan Opera? Do you have any of those type of sponsors yet?

Emory  Taylor 00:14:24.060
No we don't. Our base money comes from what people pay us to perform. Our performance fees.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:14:31.120
Can you tell us a little about your performances. As we said at the top of the show you give about 40 performances a year. How does someone get in touch with you for a performance? Where do you perform and how do you work your fees?

Emory  Taylor 00:14:44.400
We now have an agent that we took on a few months back Lincoln Courtney Artists Management at 8 3 2 7 0 2 5. They handle all of our bookings for us. All of our arrangements for the company and for our individual performers. We have two small jazz groups out of the Harlem Opera Society the Jazz Up ensemble and the Uptown ensemble- consisting of our singers and musicians. Seven singers and musicians each in each group which perform independently that helps supplement our income and also because we are concert performers. When a black opera singer out of the Harlem Opera Society performs in concert we perform as jazz artists, not in the way that the traditional metropolitan opera classical artists perform.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:15:38.901
Now we were talking before the show about the what I call the artistic fanaticism of people in the field of opera. It's unmatched other than maybe the fanaticism tennis players golfers or something like that. Once you get bitten by the bug you seem to stay bitten and spend a great deal of your energy and time dealing with this. Is this something that has happened to you and some of the members of the Harlem Opera society?

Emory  Taylor 00:16:07.390
Yes it's it's both a strength and a problem. I got interested in opera because my mother took voice lessons when I was young and I heard her singing Mimi's Aria from La Belle M. And I wondered about it. What was my mother doing? And it sounded interesting because a voice could go up so high and actually what attracted me was not the content -I didn't understand the song- but the fact that she could take her voice and do those tricks with it. You know her ability, her command over her instrument not the subject matter so much. I eventually went out and bought some operatic records and I listened to Caruso and and many of the old 78 and it was once again not the content of the record as much as their vocal ability. From that point on, vocal ability I carry through with the Harlem Opera Society. We feel that our singers are absolutely the best in the world. I have maintained that no singer in any opera house can stand toe to toe with with one of our singers from the Harlem Opera Society and out sing them. We've proven it. Our tenor has been at the New York City Opera. Our culture has been at the New York City Opera. I've watched them when they've been onstage and I've watched the audiences. We hold our own with anyone. I'm waiting any day and this is a challenge.I'll put it on the air anytime the Met, La Scala, or New York City Opera- and I shouldn't even up the New York City Opera in there because they're not a singing company- anytime they want to sing down. A sing down will give me 3000 average individuals. I don't want Opera fanatics, people just people give me 3000 people in philharmonic hall in any auditorium put my singers up and but they're singers up and let's see who who the public likes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:17:54.720
I notice you excluded Opera fanatics. Are you suggesting that opera fan aficionados dislike baseball fans tend to prejudge people on the basis of their reputation?

Emory  Taylor 00:18:06.790
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:18:07.211
And where they come from and what you want to do is just see the basic natural talent. Well if that's the case what is it? And maybe this is not a particularly good question: what keeps some of let's say of your performers from moving into the Met? Is it the fact that many of them have other occupations that they really prefer to deal with an Indigenous opera company? Or is it discrimination?

Speaker 13 00:18:31.480
It's discrimination. It's the subject matter of opera and above all it's the aesthetics of opera. I have a baritone. His name is Abraham Lindo Kendo- Puerto Rican baritone a graduate of Manhattan School of Music. He graduated from Manhattan School of Music and had no voice. He came to Harlem to learn how to sing. He studied with me and got his voice together. He is now the leading baritone of the Bremen opera. He's homesick. He's depressed he's forced to leave New York to leave East Harlem where he grew up- his parents now live in the Bronx, Puerto Rican parents whose parents live in the Bronx- he has to stay in Europe 10 months a year.Now what person, I refuse to go to Europe. I knew you know my coach you said you'd make a good Wagnerian singer go to Europe- your German's great why don't you go. I said this is my home. Why should I be run out of my home? In order to become an expatriate running around Europe singing for people that I don't necessarily consider friends or neighbors. I don't get good feelings from that. This is home and that's a foreign land. If I can't make it at home I won't make it. That's my reason for being here. And over there he's homesick. When he comes back he sings for his family and his friends they pack they pack the auditoriums. What won't your next patriot come back and sing for us? Why won't they hire you over here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:20:05.750
Well what can be done about that. Because you made a very clear charge and it's a charge of the number of people have made including the New York City Human Rights Commission namely the Metropolitan Opera is discriminatory. It's true they have some superstars who are black but this in terms of the overall range. The data tend to show that they have underrepresentation of Blacks and Puerto Ricans. What really can be done about?

Emory  Taylor 00:20:30.370
I'd like to make a correction there. The Metropolitan Opera is the more liberal of our two companies in New York. The one that I would definitely charge with prejudice at this point would be New York City Opera. The New York City Opera 15 years ago used to be the liberal company. It seems that the worm turns.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:20:48.891
How do you relate to the director?

Emory  Taylor 00:20:51.913
Yes

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:20:51.916
-part of the man Right now the Met has been doing a good job. I'm sorry this guy Chapin and was fired because Chapin and had a feeling for Americans and I'm chauvinistic. You know I'm black but I'm an American. Chapin had a feeling for American artists for American singers -managing an opera company is a tough job. It takes time to learn it. He was getting the house together. He was saddled with a lot of decisions he had made himself personally. By the time he was getting his job together and really getting on top of it that that small percentage of fanatics had managed to get him kicked out. Now this new fella's coming in Bliss who's been around, but Bliss once again is not a musician he's not an artist we don't know what kind of of of real choices he's going to make. The Metropolitan Opera basically doesn't relate to America by.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:21:47.530
By that you mean by their content or by the selection of performers or by just the way they run?

Emory  Taylor 00:21:52.960
By their general attitude. The problem with opera is that it is European. No one has seriously set about establishing opera as an American form as drama has been established in the United States. When we deal with drama, we can deal with some things that are very American. We deal with opera we're dealing with some things that are very very foreign.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:22:14.741
And well of course this is like saying when you go to Europe and you deal with basketball you're doing something that is very American and maybe basketball is an American format and that's where it's going to be. Maybe opera is a European format.

Emory  Taylor 00:22:28.031
The Russians-the Russians play basketball. Let's face it they don't play our style basketball but they do play basketball. We in America do sing opera The Harlem Opera society is an opera company but we sing an American opera out of our American tradition, out of our American sensibilities, out of our American feelings, and we sing it for American people. And we maintain that anyone can walk in off the street. They don't have to go to a library. They don't have to learn a foreign language. They don't have to take a brush up courses in an opera plots. They just come in sit down and have a good time.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:23:04.301
Well speaking of coming in and sitting down and having a good time would you tell us a little something about your opera- the opera that the Harlem Opera society gives the Black cowboys. Could you tell us something about that when it's going to be given again?

Emory  Taylor 00:23:16.420
Well Black Cowboys this is what we feel a very special American

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:23:21.010
-that's very American-

Emory  Taylor 00:23:21.861
-a very American opera. There was one -a girl Golden West which Puccini did which is right as it's it's hilarious. It's as bad as the baritone A.B. does 'Porgy and Bess' in German in Bremen which I think is as about as farcical as you can imagine. He's forgotten the English version he's been in Germany so much but to do 'Porgy and Bess' in German seems about as obscure and as far out as possible.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:23:48.610
That' very interesting that you say does 'Porgy and Bess' in German, yet still here in America we do many Italian operas in Italian. Why can't they do Porgy and Bess in England?

Emory Taylor 00:23:58.840
Because in Germany they wonder know what's going on but the Metropolitan Opera House don't want to let the public in on it- on the secret you know they're still doing things in foreign language. I must say Western Reserve opera out on the coast is developing an audience for English opera so that people don't have to get translations and go through it. When I first went to the Met -when I first went to the Met I saw I can't remember the opera but I sat there and I didn't like the performance. I was in my freshman year at music school and I didn't want to tell anyone that I didn't like the performance because I had just come from Harlem. I didn't have any background and it took me 10 years to tell someone-

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:24:38.910
-to tell someone you didn't like it!

Emory  Taylor 00:24:39.900
I thought it stank!

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:24:40.920
-but it probably did!

00:24:41.972
It took me years before I could tell them point by point why it stank whereas as a freshman I couldn't say anything and say well what do you know, you come from Harlem you were born in Georgia what do you know about Italian opera or German opera Mozart or Puccini or whatnot. Now I'm a specialist in European opera. I can tell them why European opera stinks and where it stinks and why it doesn't apply to the general American public. In actuality, America did have a legacy from opera -from Italian opera- the American pop song tradition the pop song tradition stems from Puccini. When you hear Frank Sinatra and all the American pop singers -they're singing Puccini melodies that the Italian community converted when they came over here to the United States and made into an American thing. There are two streams of tradition in American popular music: the Black tradition and the Italian Puccini.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:25:41.880
Is that one reason why so many of these so-called crooners were people from Italian background?

Emory  Taylor 00:25:47.030
Yeah yeah yeah that's right Tony.

Emory  Taylor 00:25:49.350
The Italian street singers contributed to American popular music and they are -the Blacks and the Italians- you know I I feel together we rule that the pop music world here in the United States. I mean that's it. In the world now because everyone is imitating one or the other of us. And now we're imitating each other. There's such a cross pollination and the whole thing. But this this American music scene is really part of the operatic tradition but most of us don't think of Frank Sinatra and the songs he sing is as having stemmed from Italian opera.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:26:23.803
Now could you tell our audience when some of your performances will be given in the coming season. Approximate dates and so on.

Emory  Taylor 00:26:33.770
Well they- we'll be doing Solomon and Sheba at Bronx at- pardon me New York Community College on February 27.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:26:40.661
Now that's in Brooklyn

Emory  Taylor 00:26:42.230
-in Brooklyn, that's in Brooklyn right across the bridge in Brooklyn. We'll be doing some new operas at the Harlem Performance Center on 7th Avenue between January 7th and

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:26:55.340
-anyone who wants to get further information should call what number?

Emory  Taylor 00:26:58.660
the Harlem Opera Society at 6 6 6 7 1 4 4 or the Harlem Performance Center 8 3 2 8 6 2 3 thousand.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior 00:27:07.601
All right. Thank you very much. Our guest tonight on solar reason has been Emory Taylor director of the Harlem Opera society.

Pre-recorded Introduction 00:27:14.080
You've been listening to 'Soul of Reason' with your host the director of the Institute of Afro one African affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. 'Soul of Reason' is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

