Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:01.510
What are the problems of today's Puerto Rican youth? How can organizations like ASPIRA deal with these problems? Is there too much competition among blacks and Puerto Ricans for available funds? Here, Mario Anglada, executive director of ASPIRA New York, answer these questions on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:41.720
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thoughts. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:08.513
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is Mario Anglada, executive director of ASPIRA New York. Glad to have you with us tonight, Mario.

Mario Anglada 00:01:15.952
Thank you very much. Glad to be here.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:17.841
Now we are talking about the problems of Puerto Rican youth, particular Puerto Rican youth in New York. And I was wondering if you could tell our audience what are some of the major problems that Puerto Rican youth in New York and some of the other major cities tend to face.

Mario Anglada 00:01:33.160
Well, you name it and you'll find it. There are some very basic educational problems. There are very serious health problems. There is the problem of discrimination and unemployment. And in cases where people are employed they are in situations and positions that do not measure up to their abilities. There is a problem of communication, styles of life. The problem of not having enough power to make decisions, or help the community make decisions. So these are some of the very basic problems and we have had them for quite a long time in New York and the other places.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:02:24.326
Of course...and you add those up and you get a real picture of social deprivation and social discrimination and personal misery and the problems that Puerto Rican youth face in a city like New York certainly not unlike the problems that black youth face in New York and Chicano youth face in other places and Appalachian youth face in places like Chicago. And this raises the real question as to: where do you begin? And ASPIRA as an organization has a word which talks about our aspirations and where the Puerto Rican people are going and where underprivileged people are going. And I understand it has a national umbrella. And it also has the local organization in New York--ASPIRA of New York--which you head as the executive director. Would you tell us a little about ASPIRA, both its national concerns and its organization and then its local concerns and exactly what it does?

Mario Anglada 00:03:25.551
Yes. Let me start with ASPIRA New York because ASPIRA New York was created before the national organization was created.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:32.492
That was ASPIRA of New York was really the first to speak...

Mario Anglada 00:03:35.234
It was the first ASPIRA--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:36.021
...and that probably comes from the fact that there are probably more Puerto Ricans in New York than in any other city and country.

Mario Anglada 00:03:41.830
That's right. And there was the development of a consciousness in New York that did not show up in other parts of the United States. And ASPIRA of New York is 13 years old. And it was concerned...it's been concerned for all these years with the concept of leadership. With the...idea that the Puerto Ricans as citizens must take their own hand, their destiny, and their participation in society. And in that sense we have developed programs which tend to develop this leadership in high school youth mostly. Of course we also believe that formal education is a kind of...'via regia' to get to the places in this society. But ASPIRA is not only a place where we try to...place students in...institutions of higher learning, but also has a program that deals with the actual development of leadership. And it has three aspects, this leadership development. There's an aspect of learning about your own identity -- what it means to be a Puerto Rican. And from it as you know you have to find out what you are before you can even collaborate in...the mainstream of society. So there are courses, there are tips. There are readings which allows the students to kind of find out what his historical and social and cultural background is.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:23.691
Has always been a part of ASPIRA's program, or is this something that is sort of an offshoot of the more recent move among many ethnic groups--particularly among blacks--for identity?

Mario Anglada 00:05:35.232
It has always been a part.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:36.861
It should be but--and this is true with black movements as well--but probably in the late '60s and early '70s the movement to stress one's identity and where one came from has accelerated considerably, and I imagine ASPIRA's program has accelerated likewise.

Mario Anglada 00:05:53.763
Right now in this leadership program we have about 2000 Puerto Rican high school students and a... there is a second aspect which I think is very important. In terms of...you know I am an educator, and one of the reasons I came to ASPIRA was because I was a little tired of looking at what the school does. Formal education I felt had a pace which wasn't keeping up with kind of concerns and the kinds of potentiality of young people. Schools usually in a sense tells students, 'Wait until you learn.' Well...ASPIRA I think is a complement to that in the sense that students while they are learning these things, in school and in ASPIRA, they act. They go into the community.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:06:50.072
Now what do they do? That's a very good point. What are some of the kind of actions that they carry out?

Mario Anglada 00:06:55.401
They bring out the votes for example you know that...it's amazing, in Puerto Rico usually a Puerto Rican population votes about...85 percent.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:07:06.321
Which is higher than the United States population--

Mario Anglada 00:07:07.372
It's higher than in the States--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:07:07.378
...which only votes about 65 percent.

Mario Anglada 00:07:10.401
That's right. But something happens to the Puerto Rican when he comes to New York, that he doesn't vote. So for example in the last election for local boards, school boards, ASPIRA students went into the community to try to persuade the Puerto Rican citizens to come out and vote. That's one kind of thing...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:07:35.901
Part of the reason why many Puerto Ricans probably don't vote is the discomfort that some may find in terms of their ability to handle some of the language barriers and some of the excessive formality that goes into voting. And I do know that the Elections Commission has tried to deal with this somewhat probably not as effectively as probably should be. And having young people like the leaders from ASPIRA go out into the community to communicate to the Puerto Rican citizen in the street, as it were, that yeah, there are people there who know the Spanish language system really isn't quite so bad and if you have any problems ask questions. And I would imagine you even have some of the young people take the voters to the poll. Of course that has some other kind of problems, which was alleged widely in this recent school board election, namely that people were brought out and were told to vote but of course Puerto Ricans or blacks or no one else has any corner on that market because that's been happening in the electorate since time immemorial. And of course the only real solution of that is to educate the electorate, which I'm sure is one of the platforms of ASPIRA.

Mario Anglada 00:08:50.180
Yes we do have a Puerto Rican parents-students guidance program which was...mostly it's devoted to helping parents understand what the school is all about--what are their rights, what are their duties--and this program was a pilot program. Now since disappeared, we plan to bring it back in some other way...in order...because the Puerto Rican parent is in a different system. It's not only language but also the...the conception of the institution of the school is a different one.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:09:25.341
Now how is it different? That's an interesting point.

Mario Anglada 00:09:27.561
Yes yes. The place of the teacher for example...the teacher in an agrarian society, like some towns in Puerto Rico, is considered a person who is full of wisdom.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:09:45.381
He's on a pedestal, or she's on a pedestal.

Mario Anglada 00:09:48.563
And what she says, goes. And there are of course authoritarian aspects to this....to this role which people respect very much. In New York we know that in the past years this has been disappearing as an image of a teacher. And the teacher can make mistakes. The teachers can discriminate, the teachers can...are human. So that's one important difference in the perception of the teacher...and...it's probably a reason why parents don't go to school so much here. Because they...they respect the opinion of the teacher.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:34.431
Well not only that...I would imagine some of it has to do with some parents. And this is true of parents from different cultural backgrounds whether black or Slavic or what have you...tend to feel uncomfortable speaking with a teacher because they feel they don't have the communication skills to communicate with the teacher, which of course really isn't true. So long as you can speak you can communicate.

Mario Anglada 00:10:56.862
Right.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:58.091
And the other part of it has to do with the fact that possibly some teachers have not made parents feel comfortable.

Mario Anglada 00:11:03.722
Right...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:11:03.727
When they communicate to them. There are certainly different ways of describing anything. You don't have to use a two dollar word when a 50 cent word or even a 10 cent word would help. Now in your leadership program you do make it possible for young people to get contacts with colleges because I know I've seen ASPIRA groups at colleges all over the East ranging from city universities to university like New York University and Columbia to some of the Ivy League schools. Now what is your objective there? Is your objective to let these young people know that colleges are available and that many of them are looking for Puerto Rican youth? Or is it a combination of that, plus helping to motivate the youngsters themselves so that when they see this environment, they see these students, they get a chance to meet some of the teachers they feel that, 'This is a place that I could fit in to.'

Mario Anglada 00:12:03.971
Yes. Our objectives are multiple because they start to see the ASPIRA we call the ASPIRA...education, if you want to call it that way, an ASPIRA process. The leadership experience should lead to interest and motivation to go into more formal education. So these students, who are now in three...leadership centers throughout the city--Brooklyn, Bronx, and Manhattan--will be counsel at the centers themselves. To get interested and to...you see, sometimes a poor person doesn't even know that he has to fill a paper in order to go to college. He doesn't even know he had to go and take an examination, usually called the College Board Examination. So...he...he may have the ability and the capacities but he may not know the instrumental steps to get some place.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:13:11.282
Now what do your counselors do? They actually fill out the applications for the students, or do they get the applications or do they guide the students into obtaining the applications for themselves and then checking the applications after they've been filled out?

Mario Anglada 00:13:26.171
Yes. We try to steer away from paternalism, from doing things and developing dependency. So what we do is help them understand the concept of the application and check with them the procedures of...filling the application. But you see the work is not finished there. As you know now about 14 percent of the Puerto Ricans who entered...while in the...in the public education...public educational system will graduate from high school. Of that, no more than three or four percent will go to college. Of those, 60 percent will drop out without finishing the college career. So it is not only a matter of stimulating students to get into college is to present them with possibilities for funding for example, economic assistance. So ASPIRA does this. Also as you said very well they get pictures of various colleges to decide where would they fit best. Colleges have styles. Colleges have a community life so that's also very important. The front that we present to helping them... them stay in college. And this is what our college retention program...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:15:00.401
College retention program.

Mario Anglada 00:15:03.432
College retention program.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:15:04.271
That means that some of the youngsters come back to the ASPIRA groups or to their counselors and talk with them.

Mario Anglada 00:15:10.061
Yes, yes this is a continuous process. Many of them they come back because they need help of different kinds.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:15:17.831
Now talking about that, one of the allegations is that the reason why many minority youth--blacks and Puerto Ricans--don't stay in school and graduate is because they aren't academically prepared. Of course the counter to that is that unfortunately the schools which are predominantly black and Puerto Rican generally do not have the curriculums... curricula and the teachers who are able to relate to the youngsters in order to develop these skills. But it's a cycle. So that if youngsters graduate from high school with certain deficiencies, the question is what does one do when they get into a college environment? Now does ASPIRA provide tutoring or they try to get the colleges to do this or what?

Mario Anglada 00:16:01.220
ASPIRA does both. Provides some tutoring, sometimes peer tutoring: student to student. But also ASPIRA have a I think a very important function I have not mentioned yet, what we call advocacy. We advocate certain services, certain positions, certain placements would be made for Puerto Rican students not only in the college level, in the high school level. So the students become not only their own advocates, but also through whatever power ASPIRA have developed intersects and talks to the colleges so that these services would be provided.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:16:41.101
What about the allegation that this tends to build a system based on quotas, on ethnic quotas, on racial quotas? That if you appoint a teacher or counselor because they are black or because they are Puerto Rican...what about that allegation? That's a very prominent allegation now which has brought about a lot of conflict both in the ranks of teachers and professors and the ranks of students. Generally it's a question of haves and have-nots, the ones who have been getting the services and the jobs are upset because the blacks and Puerto Ricans are now getting services and jobs. And the allegation then is that regardless of whether a person is white or black or yellow, if he has the technical training he ought to be able to do the job. And if he takes an exam and he comes out highest on the job...er, exam, he ought to get the job and he shouldn't be bypassed because someone is of a particular minority group that is reflected in the predominance of the student body.

Mario Anglada 00:17:38.580
I think that sounds beautiful. Only if the opportunity is that the person will have to compete at the same level they were there. But you yourself have said that the black and Puert Rico schools have the worst teachers and the worst facilities. It doesn't... they don't come to compete at the same level.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:18:01.010
Now let me clarify that, because we frequently say that: is that the blacks and the Puerto Ricans had the worst teachers and worst facilities. In many instances they are in older buildings which could conceivably... can be considered to be poor facilities. On the other instance and sometimes they are in new buildings as well which raises a question about the facilities. And then of course the question about the teachers, the worst teachers. What you find in many situations is that schools that previously had high academic reputations, performance, and part of the students with the same teachers tend to do not as well when the school population becomes black and Puerto Rican. So when you say 'worst teachers,' are you really saying that the teachers are really poorer, or are you saying that they do not have the interest and/or ability to relate to people of different backgrounds?

Mario Anglada 00:18:52.201
I've lived in two senses. Through my experience as a teacher training at Queens College for example, our young graduates will always go to ghetto schools for example. They were they...they are people who are just learning their trade, and thus they don't have the many skills that you have to learn not from academia but through doing things and through teaching. That's one aspect.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:19:17.762
However, that can be countered by the fact that as we ask for more black and Puerto Rican teachers generally speaking the ones we asked for are young. So if you're saying that young teachers are poor if they're white, the logic would suggest that young teachers are also poor if they're black or Puerto Rican.

Mario Anglada 00:19:32.440
Yes. The only thing is I would not advocate for school having all white teachers or all black teachers or all Chinese teachers or all Puerto Rican teachers. I think that...I think that's a mistake. One of the most important experiences in teaching is learning from other teachers. So...I would like to have young teachers, older teachers, of all colors and all shapes in the school.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:20:01.560
In other words, you wouldn't want a clustering of all older teachers or all white teachers or all younger teachers. And actually what happens in the schools frequently is this very clustering that you don't think is desirable.

Mario Anglada 00:20:12.391
That's right. That's right. And also I meant the worst teachers in the sense of psychological perception of a teacher who thinks it's almost a self-fulfilling prophecy. That a student of such and such a...race or economic status can't do it. He becomes depressed and perceives his students' differently when they are of a different socioeconomic level or a different color. And does he or she becomes a worse teacher given being in the same place which she was before, you know?

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:20:47.260
Of course that raises the interesting question that is if that in fact is the case and it probably is in some instances...what is a large system like New York City that has some 64,000 teachers--of which maybe eight percent are black and two percent are Puerto Rican--what do they do when you have a mass of your teachers who happen to be white and because racism is so predominant in our society. Quite possibly many of them have assumed these self-fulfilling prophecies. What does one do? Does ASPIRA get into this, do you get into things like helping teachers to develop a better awareness of the needs and aspirations of Puerto Rican students?

Mario Anglada 00:21:31.921
We...we haven't. We don't have the means or resources to do that just yet but we are developing a new structure in ASPIRA called the ASPIRA Educational Opportunity Center, which we hope could develop not only curricula but training for teachers who will be interested in your system. I think we see Puerto Ricans as even worse. This idea of the teacher who understands...because it's not only a teacher that knows subject matter, is a teacher who knows human styles and knows human reactions that...New York is too far away from an agricultural society. There are some reactions that and some understandings that are purely agricultural or agriculturally based, and there are some understandings that are cultural.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:22:28.140
I noticed you mentioned a couple of times agrarian, agricultural society and reflecting on the fact that many of your Puerto Rican youth and most of your families have recently migrated to the United States--recently being the past 20, 25 years. Is it really true that the majority of the Puerto Ricans who have migrated to the States come from agrarian communities? Because Puerto Rico is becoming more industrialized. I can't pass a value judgment...and maybe you can't either, as to whether this is desirable or not. But there have been such things as reverse migrations as matter of fact about three or four years ago more people--well, Puerto Rican people--were actually leaving the States to go back to the island than were coming from the island to the States. So that you stress this idea of the agrarian backgrounds of many of the Puerto Rican youth...and that still is a fact at this time?

Mario Anglada 00:23:29.490
I have looked at some studies of that and what happens is that many of these Puerto Ricans who come here, they come from cities but they have been in cities a very short time. So it appears as if the main migration comes from cities but is actually not...not quite so. They're transients. They come from...from an agricultural background into a city and then in six...five to six months, they leave for the United States. And of course the migrant workers they are agrarian, and at the peak point there were about 40,000 migrant workers, Puerto Rican migrant workers in New York...in the States.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:24:11.642
In the States, but not too many in New York City, I would assume. The very nature of migrant work keeps them...

Mario Anglada 00:24:18.000
In the northern part of New York there are some. Many in New Jersey, over 14,000.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:24:23.641
Now as we think about all of these various programs many of them have the same thrust as programs that many of the black youth serving organizations...organizations like the Urban League, organizations like...various community programs that have been sponsored to mobilize black youth for schools. Things like Harlem Prep and so on. Now this raises the question as to whether there is too much competition between the blacks and the Puerto Ricans for the available funds because so frequently you find programs for the disadvantaged and generally are thinking about blacks and Puerto Ricans. And in some communities blacks seem to get a disproportionate share of the monies. And of course this leads the Puerto Ricans to claim that they are really being ignored, which in all probability they are. Is there too much competition, is this competition beginning to smooth out, is there getting to be more awareness of these concerns?

Mario Anglada 00:25:27.121
There is more awareness I think, but the competition is still there. Because there have not been too much communication and organizations across groups that will alleviate this competition. You know when always is resources even in the United States are meager. When dispossessed people are trying to get those resources, usually the ones at the bottoms have to fight hardest, and they fight with each other. And this is very.. I think it's depressing. I think it shouldn't be this way. But as the funds keep contracting, I think the last four or five years, I'm afraid that if we don't do something and get together and talk to each other, the competition is gonna get even harder.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:26:23.762
And of course in talking with each other I guess it does mean that some of the stereotypes that each group has of the other has to be dealt with because the people of color have stereotypes about each other just like white people of different backgrounds have stereotypes. And of course that's one reason why we look into things like this on "Soul of Reason" to bring about a forum for analysis and dialogue of various social issues of this type. Now in the future what are some of the things that ASPIRA plans to do in order to broaden their program?

Mario Anglada 00:27:02.101
Well I mentioned one thing: I mentioned the development of packages, our curricular packages about the Puerto Ricans and the Puerto Rican situation. We have just gotten into the drug prevention field. We believe that the ASPIRA clubs are important in developing students who fight drugs...we are hoping to really get more into the bilingual field and and have bilingual education become an established curricula.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:41.590
OK, that's a good point. Something we didn't get a chance to talk about and maybe on a future program we will. Our guest on tonight "Soul of Reason" has been Mario Anglada, executive director of ASPIRA New York and he's been talking with us about some of the activities of his organization to help solve the problems of Puerto Rican youth and other disadvantaged youth in our city. Thank you, Mario.

Mario Anglada 00:28:04.031
Thank you.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:05.050
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

