Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.400
What are today's black students thinking about? What happened to the activism of the black students of the 1970s? Hear Connie Finch, sophomore student at New York University, discuss black student attitudes today on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:36.421
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:04.629.9999999999927
Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is Connie Finch, who is a sophomore student at New York University and is from Detroit, Michigan. Connie, you've spent one year at New York University and have been fairly active in some of the Black student affairs there, and I was wondering if you could reflect on your opinion of the current aspirations of today's Black college students.

Connie Finch 00:01:26.380
Well I think the Black college students nowadays have internalized a lot of their feelings, rather than dealing with changing someone else. Black students are more into changing themselves, and I think this accounts for this seemingly deep decrease in activism.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:46.391
That's kind of interesting, you say--first of all, you've admitted then--that there is a decrease in activism among black students today. At least that your perception of it.

Connie Finch 00:01:54.531
Well, a seeming decrease in activism, because I think that now we're into a truer more real thing. Because rather than speaking and talking to other people trying to change their views, we're going in and saying, "Well hey, all this jumping and shouting isn't getting anywhere." It's got to be something concrete, something thought out, and something that can bring everyone into whatever it is we're trying to do.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:23.290
That's an interesting kind of reflection; you say the stomping and jumping and shouting isn't accomplishing anything but you have to go back to 1968, 1969 when Black students first began to appear on predominantly white campuses in any significant numbers. And what they were asking for was more black faculty, they were asking for some courses about Black people in the world, they were asking for social programs, and centers, and counselors. And in a sense they have obtained many of these things. So therefore the activism of the late 60s and early 70s was really kind of enlightened self-interest on the part of Black students. True enough, it was couched sometimes in the rhetoric of helping the Black community. But basically, the things that the students went on strike for, and had set out for, and things of this type, were things that help them as students. And what you're saying is, now they've gotten those things. Now they're beginning to look at themselves rather than at the institution.

Connie Finch 00:03:25.890
Well no. There still is room for change in the institutions, but now it's a time for a new strategy. Like the jumping and the shouting and striking was good in 1967 when that was new, but in 1973, after the Vietnam War and after all the other atrocities that have been happening, I mean it's not new anymore. If someone sees it on the 6:00 o'clock news, it doesn't mean anything to them because they've been seeing dead bodies on the news for the last five years.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:55.140
Okay now as a Black student how do you respond to that challenge? Not just you as an individual, but some of the students that you've known not only at New York University, but at other universities--how are the Black students now responding to that particular challenge? The strategies of yesteryear apparently are not going to be adequate to get some of the things we want.

Connie Finch 00:04:16.680
Yeah well, it's really kind of hard because it leaves a void, and a lot of students are responding by becoming apathetic. But you've got to realize that, when you're talking to a student that appears apathetic, especially a Black student, you've got to realize that there's something you can learn from that student, and a lot of Black people are getting turned off from other Black people constantly telling them rather than coming to them to learn and to--teach something themselves. It's got to be a give and take.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:48.061
Could you give an example? I think that's a very good point. In other words, you're saying that Black students don't like to be lectured to, and people say, "I'm going to do this for you,"--that they want it to be a mutual relationship where one party helps the other party. But could you give an example of the kind of interaction that Black students would like with faculty, with community people, with university officials?

Connie Finch 00:05:11.560
Well, since we're talking about Black college students, it's--one of the highest priorities outside of the community is the type of relationship that they would have in their academic life, which accounts for like nine months of the year. And I think that the type of communication, or the type of interaction as Black students want with teachers and faculty, is just one where the teacher respects the student's ideas, and while the teacher may not agree, and the student may not agree with the teacher, there is a respect and an ability to voice your opinion whatever it is.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:48.490
Well, let's translate that into the career aspirations of the larger generation of Black college students today. Back three or four years ago, many students said they wanted to become instruments of change in the community, and they want to go back and help their people, etc. Today, is this still the prevailing thought, or is this taking another form?

Connie Finch 00:06:11.351
Well I think that Black students still want to go back to the communities and help other Black people but it's not something that they're saying. It's something that now people are really actively doing and it's more realistic, because now they realize that not only are they going to help their communities but their communities are going to help them. Now it's not Black people wanting to be doctors because, well for a long time Black people couldn't be doctors. Now people are getting into--"what do I really want?" It's not because I was denied this before, that I want to be a doctor, but because I really want to be a doctor. There's nothing wrong with being something else just because you were made to be that before. There's nothing wrong with being a teacher. You don't have to go and be something that you don't want to be, just because Black people can do that now.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:00.820
Well let's say you, Connie Finch, what are your aspirations?

Connie Finch 00:07:04.450
Well for a long time, my grandfather and all my relatives had drummed into my head that I was going to be a lawyer. And so I had decided that I wanted to be a lawyer when really, I didn't. But just because there weren't that many Black lawyers then--And still aren't. --but I really don't want to be a black lawyer!So what do you want to be? What are your aspirations?

Connie Finch 00:07:25.901
I don't know.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:27.101
That's a very interesting point. And that's a very honest statement on your part. You don't know. Yet you are from Detroit, Michigan. And you did come to New York University, which is a predominantly white university, with a significant number of Black students nonetheless, but still a predominately white university, and you came to New York. Now you must have selected New York University for a particular reason, and as a Black student you must have certain particular feelings about New York University and about New York.

Connie Finch 00:07:54.310
Well I've talked to some of the other students that have been here longer, and they tell me that New York University is supposedly unique. The attitudes that are prevalent in New York University aren't that prevalent anyplace else, but it doesn't seem that--that unique, that different from any other type of university because it's the only university that I've known. I really don't have anything to compare it with, because the other students well they've seen--I guess they've talked to students at other colleges, and they can say that. But I really can't. It's a different experience with being in Detroit, Michigan, but I can't say that it would be a different experience from being in a big school in Detroit, Michigan.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:35.919.9999999999418
Yet you did decide to come here. What caused you to come to New York?

Connie Finch 00:08:39.340.0000000000582
I don't know, it's really very strange. I didn't really give it that much thought--"I'm going to New York University." I don't know. I think it's the excitement. Believe it or not, New York still causes some excitement, and the thought of going away to New York was really exciting. But now that I've gotten here I realize that any place you go is really just the same, it's what you bring to it and the way you feel about it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:03.941
And now that you're here and you're into your school, you do have some thoughts about what you're going to do when you graduate. Your sophomore year--what--two and a half three more years to go. What are some of those thoughts that run across your mind, and maybe you could relate those to the type of career decisions that many Black students have to make.

Connie Finch 00:09:23.470
Well basically, not just in NYU but everywhere, there are really two different types of students. They're the students that have come from out of town like I have, and have come to a school, who come for different reasons than students that go to school in their hometown. A lot of times, like I noticed while I was living here, the first year I lived here I lived in the dorm, and the people--and the Black students that lived in the dorm had very little contact with the Black students that would commute. And while a lot of the Black students that lived in the dorm were most concerned with--not what they were going to be--but how they were going to spend the time after they graduate, graduated like--what types of entertainment, or they were going to travel, or they were going to go here, or they were going to see that, rather than training for any--any set thing, like they didn't they weren't going into the health profession as a such-and-such and such, you know, they were going to get their degree.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:21.160
Now that's very interesting because that really does represent a change from what the students were saying four or five years ago. Four or five years ago, they were saying that "I want to go into social work" or "I want to go into economics" or "I want to go into politics," "I want to go into education so I can go right back to the Black community and begin to utilize these skills." Now what you're suggesting is that more students, more Black students, just like their counterpart white students, are now saying, "let me learn as much as I can. Let me experience as much as I can about life, about colleges, about people. And then at a later point in time I'll decide what I'm going to do." On the other hand if you read the writings of Black students and talk with them as I do, and I know you do, you do hear this--they still hear this theme: "We want to change things in the Black community, we want to service the Black community." Now exactly what does the Black student mean when he says that?Well first of all if you go back to what you just said about paralleling the Black students and the white students with--well I really think that our thinking has changed, it's that we don't think of going back to the Black community. We think of being a part of it as we go. So it's not like we're away from it doing something because we're in it while we're doing what we're doing now.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:40.050
Even though you're on the campus of a predominately white university in Greenwich Village.

Connie Finch 00:11:43.380
Right. Because even though we're sitting here, we are surrounded, NYU--we're surrounded by Black people, there're Black people all over New York. And I think that students have had a part in opening the university a little more to the--to the Black community surrounding it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:59.730
In other words you're saying that the concept of the community becomes a larger urban concept, rather than just going back to a certain number of blocks in Bedford Stuyvesant, or a certain number of blocks in Central Harlem, or a certain number of blocks in South Jamaica, or certain parts of Detroit where they might--students might go. So then you say the university has helped to open--Black students and helped the university to open up its services and its concerns to the Black community. What are some of those concerns that you think Black students have led the universities to confront more readily?

Connie Finch 00:12:34.950
Well just in the relations the university faculty has with the Black students. I think that Black students, by being more open now, are helping Black--the Black--not the Black faculty, but the white faculty to understand more and to tolerate more, because they have to.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:55.560
Like--I'm interested in a way in which you differentiate between the Black faculty and the white faculty. But don't you believe that all faculty members, both Black and white, because both of their age and their (sometimes) academic detachment from the community, whatever the community, need to have this bridge built between the community and the university?

Connie Finch 00:13:21.240
Yes that's true. But when you speak when you talk about white faculty I think they really have two distinct problems, because not only are they detached because of their age, but for a lot of times, they're detached because of the experience and because of their whiteness, which is a part of that experience.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:37.950
And so therefore the presence of Black students in a variety of classes, in a variety of activities on campus, sort of forces the white faculty in particular, and the university in general, to begin to be concerned about some of the things that Black people are concerned about. The fairness in the prison system, the fairness in the welfare system, the adequacy of urban education, delivery of health care, and things of this type.

Connie Finch 00:14:03.780
Especially the questioning Black student in the classroom.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:07.561
Well what about the allegation that Martin Kilson made in a recent article in The Sunday Times, namely that--his observation was that so many Black students were anti-intellectual, that they really weren't that concerned with learning per se, and were more concerned with just getting the accoutrements of an education, namely getting the--the degree. What's your perception about that?

Connie Finch 00:14:30.480
Well as I said before, Black people are more concerned with internalizing and being individual. So one of the things we have to get away from is saying that--"Black students," because all Black students are not alike.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:42.870
And you Connie Finch obviously are presenting your opinion and cannot be construed as presenting an opinion for all Black students. Because all right well let's-- And that's a very good admonition. I think that's something anybody who talks about race should be aware of it--because one is Black or one has had some experience with Black people, he or she cannot speak for all Black people. That's certainly a very strong admonition. But nonetheless you have been around probably more so than let's say, a typical white student, or a typical white professor, or considerable numbers of Black students. Do you have any feeling of a trend or if--a theme of anti-intellectualism, not being serious, among Black students, or do you think that Black students are ,as a representative group, as intellectually oriented or as serious as white students, or maybe even more serious than white students? What's your perception on that?

Connie Finch 00:15:41.401
Well I don't really think that Black students are anti-intellectual. They're anti...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:15:47.401
Establishment?

Connie Finch 00:15:48.211
No, not establishment. Well in... I can't think--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:15:54.941
No, I think the fact that you are having some hesitancy reflects a gray area that students--and you've hit it. That's exactly what we are reaching for. What is that gray area? You say they're not anti-intellectual, they're not against facts and research and so on. But what is it? They are against the use of it? They're against the fact that sometimes things are made to appear more important to the academic process than they really are? They feel that sometimes the so-called academic information is a distorted version of the truth? What are some of those themes that are going on there? As you see there.

Connie Finch 00:16:29.550
Well so many times, what you are taught in school is not actually what's happening. So Blacks--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:36.361
Give an example.

Connie Finch 00:16:37.411
Well if you take history and historical perspective that many white textbooks have put Black people into. I mean--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:45.182
Let's say many textbooks which happen to be written by whites.

Connie Finch 00:16:48.050
Right. Right. And even, even now that Black people have started getting Black history classes,a lot of the times they start with slavery. That's not the beginning of Black history. I mean you know, when we landed in America, that isn't the beginning. There was--a lot of things going on before then that weren't shown.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:08.910.0000000001164
Well that's true, now of course you're differentiating now between an omission and an incorrect fact. Now you said that what they are taught is not correct, and what I was suggesting that you indicate as an example of some of the things that college students say things that are taught in college courses that some Black students feel really aren't correct and therefore don't relate to as much. Can you give an example of something like that?

Connie Finch 00:17:35.490
Well it's not really something that is just stare--that glares you in the face. It's really not what's taught, it's what isn't said or what's implied.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:43.950
For example, I know some students say, "Well I don't like to take a sociology course because all I hear is how Black families are poor.

Connie Finch 00:17:51.544
Or how--how Black families are matriarchal.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:17:55.711
Well now let's take that particular point. If in fact the statistics show that a larger proportion of Black households are headed by a single person who happens to be a woman, that in fact is, in a technical sense a matriarchy, and that a woman is heading a family. What I think the students are relating to is a social implication that because many of these families are headed by women, that in fact the Black male, the Black family is totally dominated and directed by the Black female. Which is--you have two different things there, and I would imagine that some of the students who respond to this negatively, as to the Moynihan Report which emphasizes this particular concept, are responding not so much to the statistical fact but to the implications that are derived from it, either by things that are said or not said. Now as a black student in a class or in an organization, how do you deal with something like that? Do you just internalize it and say well,  he doesn't know what he's talking about, or do you challenge it, or do you develop alternate models for thinking about it? How would you deal with something like that?

Connie Finch 00:19:11.401
Well it's really very hard because when I'm in a class room I get very emotional, and to see somebody sitting there, talking so detached about something that really affects me, it sometimes makes me very sick. And it's hard--it's hard for even me to challenge something like that because it touches me so deeply. So it's not like we're having a philosophical argument about such-and-such. This is something that hits me. This is something that touches me. It doesn't touch him. I mean the teacher could really care less, he'll go into the academic subject and he will argue point for point. And it isn't really something that's point for point. It's something that's--that's like I said, emotional, because I've had this not--not an experience necessarily talking about the matriarchal system, but in a history class even if we were to go back and talk about slavery and it's--and like to see somebody, and all the white students raising their hands--"Well Mr. Such and such, is it true that they used to chop so-and-so?" You know, and I'm really getting upset and it's like they're talking about the moon is blue. You know and their talking about--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:19.561
Because you have articulated very well what so many Black students go through. On the other hand, if one is to learn from history, if one is to learn from or to plan solutions to present problems, one does have to get to know the facts. And I think the problem here is differentiating between the facts--and the cause of the facts, or the solution to some of the negative facts that might be seen. For example, if it is reported, as it was reported recently, that the homicide rate among Blacks in New York City is twice the rate among whites. That is a fact. Now, it could be alleged that white homicides aren't being reported, and that could be checked out. But let us assume for the moment if that in fact does become a statistically valid piece of information, what does one do with it? And I think what the Black students are responding to, and you're responding to, is a kind of--anthropologist microscope looking down or out at a group of people and saying, "Well look, they are this way because of that," rather than saying "We." Because in fact, the white members of this society are just as responsible, maybe even more responsible for some of the factors of Black life and Black family life, as are the Black people themselves. So what then do Black students want in terms of some type of educational experience that they are going to feel is more relevant, and is relating more to helping them to function better in a society, and also help them to improve the conditions of Black people? What do you think students want out of these college experiences?

Connie Finch 00:22:12.240
Well I think that now we're moving towards--well in the past five years there's been a lot of talk about cultural education. Now I think, now we're moving more into, like courses like urban politics and things that--that will go right in and study things that are happening in the Black community. So we're studying why, if you talk about the homicide rate, why that's so. You know, what can be done about it. What's happening now. What are the predictions four years from now. It's more--I think what Black students want is more realistic courses that deal with things that affect them.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:54.601
Well when you say "realistic," they really want courses that won't tell you how to change the world. But if in fact something is due, let's say, to a covert pattern of racism, talking about racism certainly might help to deal with this covert racism but basically there need[s] to be certain types of changes. For example, I could posit that affirmative action programs, whereby companies have been forced legally to hire a certain percentage of Blacks, Hispanics, Asians, et cetera, has done more to bring about better relationships between people than people just talking about that society is racist. So does that not suggest that even for Black students who feel this great sensitivity, as you and I feel toward these social issues, that at some point in time there needs to be a stepping away from the issue a certain amount to be able to examine it, to determine alternatives.

Connie Finch 00:23:53.581
But how do you step away?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:55.171
Well that really is the dilemma. In a sense, this is part of what Kilson was saying. You're saying that some of the Black students are not--he uses the term "serious"-- I think they're dead serious. I also do not accept his position that the majority of Black students tend not to relate to academic things. I think that Black students, whites, and all students relate to academic things because that's what general society teaches. I think the real question is the one you're raising. That is, that the students, Black and white, but particularly the Black students, do not see the immediate relevance, the immediate importance of what they are doing in terms of solving these very massive problems of poverty and racism and inequity in the criminal justice system. And what I'm asking you now as a student, as a sophomore, not to give us solutions to these-- because, you know, if we are so smart why aren't we rich?--but to conceptualize some of the ways in which you as a Black student, and maybe other Black students that you know, perceive that the university could be changed to be able to relate more effectively to the needs of Black students and to the Black community?

Connie Finch 00:25:06.990
Well I think one of the biggest problems is the lack of communication between the students and the faculty and the university, and the students and the community. There really isn't any way, any set way, of sending out information to the community or for the community to send information to the students. That's not the whole problem, but I think if that could be alleviated, it would help a lot in the long run.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:34.730
Of course you hit on something that's very important, it really relates to the focus and the purpose of a program like the "Soul of Reason," that in order to understand any particular societal problem or concern, one has to communicate. And of course communication is a two way street. That means you have to communicate with people with whom you agree as well as people with whom you disagree. And I was wondering, is there more willingness on the part of Black students today to tolerate a variety of points of view in discussing things, or to allow a variety of points of view to be projected. Or are students more or less still at least overtly a nationalist bag, namely that Black people must think together and act together and take unified positions on things--how is that coming along?

Connie Finch 00:26:25.330
Well I think the Black students are realizing more and more that there isn't any simple answer to anything. And if there isn't any answer well then there's no saying that-- Johnny over here is right, and that I'm wrong. He can be right. He can be half right and I can be half right, or he can be right and I can be wrong. So I think there's more Black students that listen more now, you know--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:51.131
Listen to each other. In other words you have a kind of dialogue or interaction which allows many more things to happen. Also, are there more outlets for Black students to express their opinions in the form of literary magazines like "Black Creation," that's published at the Institute, or radio programs or TV or newspaper? Are there more outlets today for Black students?

Connie Finch 00:27:12.790
I think so because Black people even black students are realizing that they can get something together themselves. They don't have to wait for somebody to get a magazine together, they can do it themselves. And I think as you said, "Black Creation" is a good example of that. You don't have to wait for white people to hand you something. You can get it together yourself and express your opinions through it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:35.680
In other words there's a certain amount of spontaneous generation that Black students and Black people can pull together. All right, Connie, I want to thank you for being on our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" and discussing with us some of the concerns of Black students in today's society.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:27:53.801
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

