Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:01.340
The King George Grand Lodge on Long Island is the first grand lodge to be chartered in New York State since 1929. It is also the first integrated lodge in New York State. Here, George Sparks, Grand Master, and William Alston, publisher of The Long Island Courier, discuss the role of black masons on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:41.971
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that will examine the roots of the black thoughts. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:09.480
Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" are George Sparks, who's Grandmaster of the King George Grand Lodge, and Bill Alston who's publisher of The Long Island Courier Community Newspaper on Long Island. Glad to have you gents with us tonight.

William Alston 00:01:22.501
Glad to be with you.

George Sparks 00:01:23.351
I appreciate being here.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:24.981
All right well let's start with Mr. Sparks, George. Could you tell us about your organization. I know we said on the tease that you're the first grand lodge to be chartered in New York State since 1929. Could you tell us about that and what's the purpose of your organization and how it fits into the overall world of Masonry?

George Sparks 00:01:42.840
Well first of all, the King George Grand Lodge Limited State of New York took three years to come about by going through the legal process of the State of New York for it to be legal, because we have a lot of Masons out there that are not legal and carry it in the street. And after we received our charter last August the 6th, we've had it done at the Huntington townhouse with the honorable Senator Owen Johnson. And now we're trying to stabilize it where we can get it to function throughout all of America which we're trying to get the national charter to cover Freemasonry in the whole state of America, which covers 50 of them. And we hope, with the hard work and effort that we have been doing, we might accomplish that.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:02:27.060
Now you mentioned something as we were talking before the show about you were authorized for the letter "E." Many of our listeners don't know a great deal about Masonry so maybe you could tell us a little? Bring us back to the history of Masonry even back to Prince Hall in 1787, who founded the Black Masons. What's the purpose of the Masons and what do these various letters mean?

George Sparks 00:02:47.190
Well most anytime that you hear somebody ask, "Are you a Mason?" they say, "Are you a three-letter or a four-letter?"And there are two things you will hear: three or four. If you say three, you're talking about Prince Hall, which stands for free and accepted Masons. NowPrince Hall and the State Grand Lodge is one of the most accepted Masons or are the Masons of the world. In fact without them we wouldn't be in existence here of the King George Grand Lodge because in certain way they found it. Prince Hall found it, the State Grand Lodge taking it over because of the fact of their political influence. So they actually own it. So for us to come in to use the letter "E," or the "F" and "M," we weren't allowed to use it so they gave us the letter "E" which stands for Exalted Free and Accepted Masons. So all the other things that you hear, it isn't together. So those would be the letters that are legal within this state.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:41.460
What specifically are the purposes of Masons as an organization? Everyone's heard of Masons but sometimes you sort of get the organizations confused. Now you have a particular purpose and you go about doing some very good things in this purpose, so could you tell us exactly what your purpose is?

George Sparks 00:03:56.940
Well let's read number one: it's a secret order within certain functions of it, but then in the same token...Masons cover every aspects that covers that what the American life is doing: politics, civic organizations, community work. Behind the background these people belong to everything that's going on in the world today. And it does things for people in any way they can. More specifically you know they help their brothers, from one to the other. But they are involved heavily on trying to help people within--especially our people that don't have that help. Black people out there...some of them suffer so bad, not because they can't help themselves, some of them don't want help, some others think it's about to hand it to them. But those that have any initiative or background we try to be there to help them, whether they're in the Masonic Order or out of the Masonic Order. It's a free organization. It's a nonprofit organization and it's a step together for brotherly love, which we don't have.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:00.931
Alright that's a good description. Now Bill Alston, you are a publisher of The Long Island Courier which is a community newspaper on Long Island, and you're also a Past Grand Master, I believe--

William Alston 00:05:12.922
No, Past Master...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:12.925
...Past Master. Now I don't know these differentiations, so that's very important to queue me in and queue everyone else in. First let's talk about your role as Past Master. What did you do and what were your responsibilities, then extend that into how the Long Island Courier attempts to convey some of the things that the Masons are doing?

William Alston 00:05:32.160
Well the term Past Master refers to the fact that you were once a Master of a lodge. Each...the Grand Lodge has a number of subordinate lodges and each lodge has what is called a Worshipful Master, who is the master of the lodge who is the top administrator, who is responsible for that lodge's performance and its involvement in the community that it serves. In our case, my case in Roosevelt, we have the St. Peter's Lodge #49 whose Worshipful Master is James Washington. And he is the, as you might say, the top executive there. I am second in command as Senior Warden and that would give you an explanation of what the Past Master term relates to.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:06:23.960
Now as you have started this paper, successful paper in Long Island, a community newspaper, this has something to do...and it isn't an official publication the Masons, I don't believe, it's really a publication that you've started...or is it an official publication on the Masons?

William Alston 00:06:40.280
No, it's not an official publication of the Masons. It's a publication I would say that belongs to the community which the paper serves because in newspaper...in the newspaper field, the idea is it's a service kind of business. It's a business which you go into in an attempt to make a profit, but also to inform the community of what is going on in that community. What is important...primarily the good things. Because unfortunately the negative news is taken over by the large daily newspapers. So a weekly newspaper handles all of those things like when kids graduate the, as you will notice with the copy of the paper, when there are affairs that happen within the community which we come sometimes take pictures and present it on the covers of the pages of the newspaper.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:07:33.860
I see. Now this in a sense ties in with this whole idea of black community life and, as I view it and as I hear you speak, the Masons represent a significant part of black community life. Now could you expand on that a little bit? Because it is a secret order, which suggests that some people have to do a particular thing to get in there. Yet at the same time, Mr. Sparks, you had said that it does attempt to improve the quality of black life for all people regardless of whether they're Masons or not. And as we said at the top of the show, it's an integrated lodge which suggests that there must be some white members as well.

George Sparks 00:08:18.200
Right.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:18.202
So could you tell us a little something about how the Masons really try to contribute to the black community? Particularly in view of the fact that they are a secret group and they have exclusive membership...or maybe they don't. Maybe you can enlighten us on that.

George Sparks 00:08:31.041
Let me say this to you. Like myself as a Grand Master and administrator of the organization, I turn to be the type of leader that don't like to be out to represent our people and demonstrate. That's why I deal in politics to a certain...I feel in each community that we represent, which covers the whole State of New York at the time, we have people in each one of these communities. We want to know the leaders of our community. We want our people to be registered voters and church members that represent and stand up for something that people can respect. And when we have problems we'll be able to go to the leaders of that area. Either a supervisor or if he's called a supervisor, a mayor, or a chief of police, building department, health department, we want to be able to know these people to go to them direct to help, whatever the problem is in that community, rather than go out in so many ways that you see today. If you spit, somebody's demonstrating. I feel that this is the right way. And it also will give the organization and the ones that's in the various communities to know the people that represent them because look at the static that we have today you can't even call the garbage collection. Do you got to call 100 people and you still may not get service. These are the other ways that we're able to help our community without being out there, 'cause you never see it's advertised when we have problem. We go direct. And then we try to back the ones that represent us in the right way.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:09:56.970
Of course you use the term the "right way," and of course when you say "right" that's a value judgment. I think that you and in fact everyone would agree that the demonstrations that Dr. King led have done a lot to improve conditions for black people because, at least in my opinion and in the opinion of most social observers, the Civil Rights Act of '64 wouldn't have been passed without the March on Washington and the sit-ins and the like. So I don't really believe that you mean 'no demonstrations at all.'

George Sparks 00:10:23.990
No no no. I'm talking about...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:25.761
...particular form.

George Sparks 00:10:27.851
Now you say like let's take...you take some groups in the area, people that live in an area, and you get a lot of people like to hang out on corners or they don't even...they stand for nothing, not even for themselves.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:37.881
Well let's look at that...

George Sparks 00:10:38.400
They're the ones that seem to want to cause problems.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:41.911
Well let's look at that. Now you say that people hang out on a corner. If you look at the history of black communities or any community, the corner--the corner store, the bar the grocery store, what have you--has always been a place where people sort of exchanged ideas. Now is it really just bad because they stand on a corner or are you really dealing with some of the things that happen...

George Sparks 00:11:04.281
...the undesirable ones that's there and...Well  Bill, you're smiling... ...things that they do. Well you know you can go in the street and you can see a moron either laying out drunk in some areas and these are the people that causes more problems than a person that lives in a community that's trying to help the community. And you find out in a lot of times, they cause more problems than a person that's going direct trying to do something in a constructive way. Bill, you've had some ideas about that... I think what the Grand Master is saying in a sense is the ideal...in the town that I live in, in Roosevelt, I'm pretty active civically. Now Roosevelt, for the audience who may not know is a predominantly black community on Long Island. Am I correct in saying predominantly black? I think you'd be safe to say predominantly. I know the schools are about seventy-five, eighty-percent black. The schools are something like 99 percent. But the community I would say is about 80 percent. I deal with lots of civic activities and I would have to agree with the Grand Master's point that there are ways of going about doing things. And I also relate to what you were talking about when you're saying demonstrations, and I think he agrees, are sometimes unnecessary. But there are cases where certain people, for an example, when a police officer is called to the scene and there's a gentleman who has just stolen a lady's...66 year-old lady's pocketbook, and the policeman comes upon the scene and he...places this gentleman under arrest and then these undesirables decide that the police officers should not take this man away, and attempt to take him from the police officer and then you have quite a disturbance. I think these are the kind of people that he's relating to that are not going about things in the right way. Because I think all of us believe in the fact that we don't want criminals running around snatching old ladies' pocketbooks and in many cases this little old lady was black to start with. Yeah that's one of the dilemmas that faces the black community, particularly since there is a history of police brutality in our society. A lot of it. ...and a lot of it. And many of the demonstrations that probably each one of us around the table have been in at one time have been directed against police brutality. On the other hand, there is some need for some type of social control in the community in terms of: how do you maintain the integrity of your community? And we do know that much of the crime in your black and Puerto Rican areas are directed directly at people of those particular backgrounds. And in a sense a group like the Masons, that attempt to establish a dialogue with law enforcement officers and with citizens, have an important role to play in dealing with this. And I can really understand what you're trying to do there. Well you know where I've had a situation out in Amityville area, where they start demonstrations, and we find out that the actual ones was involved in the demonstrations were people that weren't even working, men that weren't married, weren't living with their wives, and they created such a problem. It was...it was really, really something and a hassle. And you wouldn't want to demonstrate behind people like that. Well I can certainly see that. I believe that one of the things that is important for our audience to recognize is that the Masons is a group of people who are dedicated to improving the quality of life for all people. And stand up for our people. Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" have been George Sparks, Grand Master of the King George Grand Lodge, and William Alston, who is publisher of The Long Island Courier. Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" are George Sparks who's Grand Master of the King George Grand Lodge and William Alston who is editor of The Long Island Courier and Past Master of one of the lodges on Long Island. Now as we were talking earlier, there are some whites in the King George Grand Lodge. Yet I believe there is in New York State one lodge that's primarily white. I don't know what the name is, maybe it's the New York Grand Lodge, and one that is primarily black, which is a Prince Hall Masons which was founded by Prince Hall back in 1787. Prince Hall who fought in the Revolutionary War, a great black person from Boston, Massachusetts. Could you tell us the difference between these organizations and how your organization is unique, in that as you say it's an integrated lodge? Well let's say this: all Masons are on the same. The teachings are the same, and all their things are the same. I just feel as an individual person that was selected to be Grand Master, that this world...we all have to live in it together. And I wanted to have it so we can deal with the whites and not separate. We've had enough separation throughout all these years--as you've mentioned about Dr. Martin Luther King. He was trying to get us together but we only going to get together through one another. I don't like to have that separation because we're supposed to be God's children and there's no such thing as a separation. I have to go to the white man for something almost on my daily routine. Sometimes, in some cases even getting home. So I don't want to have a thing of separation, and the Masons have been separated. They don't reckon...some of them at one time didn't recognize one another. So I don't know if I'll ever change the system, but I'm definitely going to have in this jurisdiction that it's accepted for all people--white, black, regardless of who you are or what you are, your nationality--the only thing we say is you must not be an atheist. That you must believe in God Almighty. This is interesting, since the Masons must be exempted from the Civil Rights Law of New York State. Because I thought that it was illegal for organizations to discriminate. Well I guess that means organizations that receive any federal funds because if, as you suggest, the white Masons and the black masons really do this... Well let's put it this way... ...violates one... ...I think it's a question of whether their charter, or however they discriminate, is just like they just put themselves together and this is where they have more or less stayed. All right... Let's talk about this. When Prince Hall founded the Black Masons, at least I would believe that he didn't found them just to be black because he wanted them to be away from white people. It was because, remember, in 1787 there was a tremendous amount of slavery and oppression and that white people just wouldn't accept blacks as Masons [Sparks and Dr. Brown speaking at same time]. And the question that remains today is whether or not the so-called "white Masons" would really accept the so-called "black Masons." It's almost like the problem with school integration when schools in the South became integrated. We lost practically all of our black principals, all of our black head coaches, black departmental chairmen because of integration. And this has to do with the pervasive racism and control that exists in our society. So maybe there is something good about having black Masonry so that blacks can join together and gain these forces and fight off some of these inroads of race. Well this...this is the, you know, you got a lot of organizations that, just like the fire departments on the island, they had such hassles just to say, "Well we [want to] integrate, but one person didn't accept him so he didn't get in," and this went on for years. Now why should a man be able to not get on a fire department that doesn't pay any money and it's a community service. Because it's like a clique. I mean this is basically, I don't say Prince Hall or the State Grand Lodge carries theirs intentionally this way because they're not, it's not a closed door to anybody's membership...but I'm saying I'm opening a door for all walks of life regardless on who. And they don't come to me directly, they have to go to the masses of the lodge that's within their community. But we open the doors for all walks of life, period. All right. Well Bill, suppose you tell us something about the eligibility for membership in Lodges generally. We've spoken earlier about the fact that it's a secret group. And as it being a secret group, that means it must have certain exclusionary provisions. And in 1975 when we are trying to think about people working together, why is there need for a secret society one that excludes? How do you get into this society? What is your basis for carrying yourselves as an organization? Well I would say that exclusions...when you talk about exclusions, the only exclusions--and I think the Grand Master would bear me out--that I can see of excluding anyone from becoming a Mason would be a person of bad character who is not interested in humanity. And um... Suppose he was an agnostic and of excellent character and had a fantastic job and was doing great things...because he doesn't believe in God, you would exclude him. Is that correct? Unfortunately I think... Unfortunately. Now you did use unfortunately, which mean you personally think it was... No no no, wait a minute. I don't say unfortunately. I say that because Masonry is connected with religion, and therefore in order and...we don't exclude because we don't feel the person should be a part of the organization. They are excluded by nature of the fact that the organization itself is very closely tied with religion. I'd like to say this on that. I personally, as an individual, I don't believe I will have any lodge anywhere, or any Eastern Star Chapter which we hold, that could open up a chapter or have anything that the gathering of Masons resemble without doing a prayer. And if you don't believe there's a God above, you don't belong into this organization, because he is our Supreme Master. I know I go into lodges and it's just like a minister would say, "Well I want you to stand up and give us a word of prayer." You can't say, "Don't call me." Well first of all if you can't lead yourself and your family, how can you come into the Masons in which you're supposed to stand up to represent somebody, and you can't lead a word to prayer? We make sure that our leaders in this organization are people that...like I say we want registered voters. We want people that belong to a church and we want people who have pure in heart and that to me is the most important thing. So that should answer that. Alright well let's follow that, because you mentioned several things I don't believe--although it's nice I did register to vote--that being a registered voter... We can't make 'em, but we ask them to be. I also don't believe, and maybe I'm wrong on this, that you can require people to go to church or some religious group. Now when you say religious group now...does this...is this limited to Christianity, or does this include any group that espouses a supreme being? Any group that believes in God Almighty. I see. So therefore it really isn't directly related to Christianity per se, I see. We don't say that they have to be a registered voter, but we we try to make them. Because we do stand for something. I see. Now again, could you enlighten our audience somewhat about the relationship between Masonry and religion. Now certainly religion is one of...man's major ways of controlling social behavior, but it's not the only one. Yet in this particular organization you're relating it to religion. How specifically is Masonry related to... Well let's go to the Bible again. The Bible teaches us that we should live by the laws of the land. And these laws are made by me and you and everybody else. And God gave us all a gift and a talent. And the nation goes back to biblical days, the teachings of the various temples in how they would've done and all that sort of stuff. And it also, the Bible, is the thing that we live by every day. If you can understand it. Now that's just like... So then the tenets of Masonry really are based on Christianity, because if you're saying they relate to the Bible that relates to Christianity per se. Yet in your organization, you would accept Muslims and Moslems and Buddhists and Bahais and Hindus and the like. As long as they believe in God Almighty. I see. Now let's extend that. Now maybe Bill, you'll pick up on this? Let's extend that in terms of how you try to serve the community. What are some of things that your lodge or some of the other lodges might do to help serve the community? Well...we would involve ourselves in, as we've said before, in every facet of the community problems. Such as when a person's home is burned out and they need some kind of assistance. The lodge brothers would become aware of it. We would aid in any way possible if it was necessary: to gather clothes, or food, or find them a place to live, or contact the proper officials who would then in turn take care of these kinds of problems. We involve ourselves in problems of the...sanitation problems, or something of this occurs similar to what happened in New York City. Police brutality as you brought up before, a case where a complaint of police brutality was made, the brothers of the lodge would immediately intercede to see just if it was justified and, if necessary, contact the proper officials and regarding that. Well let me ask this. Suppose another organization, say a citizens group, was existing in the community. As you describe this, it sounds like the same functions that a citizen's improvement association would provide. Now is this really the limit of Masonry or is it something else? Because I can see that... It will go into a lot of extents: scholarships, the people's home for elderly. We got families that live in the other parts of the state we will go to see about. It's involved in Masonic orders, going into conventions and dealing throughout...it involves so many things. But we try to have the lodges work on an...independent basis. Excepting of what the Grand Lodge might see fit to bring forth to the lodge. But we deal in just about everything. And then Christmastime, you know, there's a lot of us out there need help. Or we can influence in various ways even other organizations that might need our influence, or we use their influence to help us get to... Well let me ask you something that some people have said: that groups like the Masons, white or black, groups that come together mainly to help each other. And I've heard Bill talk, and Sparks talk, you talked about helping the community at large. Now are your services limited essentially to helping other Masons and relatives of Masons? Or is it something that deals with the community at large? Well we deal with our brothers and sisters always, as you know, first. And you know they have the old saying of a sign or a pass or whatever you might want to put it or distress sign. Anywhere you go in the country, if you see that you're there to help that brother or sister. Or maybe lodges might call you for help, or maybe a Grand Lodge might call you for help. But it gets, runs into...God knows how many things. So we do deal with the community at large, of which we as the lodge brothers and sisters of the Eastern Star, are members of the community. So it's not a...it's not limited to just our brothers and sisters, to answer your question. Now if someone in the audience wanted to get more information about the King George Grand Lodge, they should contact you Mr. Sparks... They can call me or they can call our attorney, who is Dave Blotna at 300 Sunrise Highway, at 661-1300. 661-1300 for information about the King George Grand Lodge. Especially for our fundraising drive. We're trying to raise... Now what are you raising funds for? You told us how you're going to do these great things mainly for each other. We don't know how we're going to do it. No. How are you going to do it? What are you going to raise funds for? We're trying to raise a, trying to build...we want to build a Grand Lodge in Nassau County or Suffolk area somewhere, and we want to raise a building that would use for the whole communities and its largess to use it. And we're hoping to raise something like two and a half to three million dollars to put up one. You have grand lodges in New York, but you don't have none on the island nowhere. And we want to put the first one up out there. I see. Well as you've talked with us, you really helped us understand the role of Masonry in the lives of black community and what some of your purposes are. And Bill, as the editor of The Long Island Courier, you've helped to give us some idea of the extension of your commitment to helping the community through your publication. Our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason" have been George Sparks, who is Grand Master of the King George Grand Lodge, and William Alston, who is editor of The Long Island Courier. You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

