Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.680
You can see the art of David Hammons, Dan Concholar, Valerie Maynard, Russ Thompson and Suzanne Jackson beginning in November at the Just Above Midtown Gallery on 57th Street. Hear Linda Bryant, Director of the Just Above Midtown Gallery discuss the work of these artists on tonight's "Soul of Reason".

RadioBumper Intro 00:00:43.130
This is "Soul of Reason", a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:10.132
And with us on tonight's "Soul of Reason" is Linda Bryant, who is director of a new art gallery that is opening in Midtown on 57th Street and it's called the Just Above Midtown Gallery. Glad to have you with us tonight on "Soul of Reason" Linda.

Linda Bryant 00:01:26.131
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:26.483
And maybe you can begin in telling us just what this gallery is all about because it is a first for Black people and it is probably the first gallery on the mainstream of art in New York City.

Linda Bryant 00:01:40.971
All right. Well, Just About Midtown Gallery ,as you stated, is located at 50 West 57th Street on the fifth floor. The purpose of the gallery is to promote Afro-American art, primarily. It's a 20th century gallery, but we're going to feature Afro- American artists and promote them in a commercial market, in a major art market district and one in the world. The gallery's purpose is to cause or to create an equivalent of Afro-American art on a promotion, recognition and sale price with the present dominant Western art stream.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:13.630
Now that's a mouthful, and let's begin to dissect it a little bit. Now you're saying that this is one of the first times and not the first time that Afro-American art -- what I tend to call Black art -- has moved into the commercial mainstream, the area around 57th Street being the commercial mainstream of art in New York, and since New York is one of the art capitals of the world, literally in the world. And, as I understand it, you are trying to do two things. One you're trying to just make the art public more aware of, and the general public, more aware of Black artists and what they're doing. And at the same time make it possible for the work of these artists to be bought because that is one of the ways as an artist supports himself or herself. And in our society they are not a goodly number of opportunities for artists of anyone to be bought, and particularly because of the racism that has existed in society in general for Black artists. Is that a fair analysis of the situation or is there something else that you see coming out of this?

Linda Bryant 00:03:26.510
Well I see more than just concentrating even on the East Coast of the United States. I'd hope that this gallery also be very instrumental in the promotion of Black art throughout the world. Presently I'm setting up European outlets so that the art can be channeled to European countries and also hopefully in the future and to African countries as well.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:47.810
Now when we talk about Black art, there are some artists including some Black artists, who say there's no such thing as Black art or Afro-American art. Of course in the general rubric of Black as I would use it it would encompass Afro-American art as well as Afro-Caribbean art as well as African art. You know from the, from the source. How do you relate to that? What are you dealing with in terms of Black art? Are you dealing with just Afro-American art or Afro-Caribbean or African or parts of all it?

Linda Bryant 00:04:22.141.0000000000291
Right. It's gonna pretty much span the scope of everything you said. Presently I'm hoping to work on a show that will show the sculpture, shown a sculpture, from Rhodesia and the southern portions of Africa. I hope, I also hope in the future like in the next two years to be able to present Caribbean artists that are also producing artworks that haven't been promoted in this country.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:43.310
Well I know it takes quite a bit to promote an artist. Many times it's done through sort of the institutional galleries and unfortunately Black artists have not really been showing very much in many of the institutional galleries although we do have in our own Black community, museums like the Studio Museum in Harlem and the work at Nigel Jackson at the Acts of Art Gallery. Now how will your gallery differ from these two?

Linda Bryant 00:05:11.003
Primarily or different no one in that most of the institutions like the ones you stated are non-profit organizations and so their major goal is not for the cell of work but for the exhibition of the works. Number two different because as you stated before I think location is essential in terms of selling art and it must be in a location where there is a steady art market flow. I think Just About Midtown Gallery will obviously be instrumental and in putting Afro-American art in a major gallery district which is has not been attempted before now this is interesting because this does represent somewhat of a different tack.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:52.780
From what was happening in the art world during the days of the revolution and that it's a shame to talk about the revolution or its past. But in many ways many of the social changes that were associated with the Black Revolution have either happened or else it looks like they're not going to happen for a while, but nonetheless many of the Black artists and Black people in the cultural world were saying that we should develop our art in our own communities, our own Black communities. We shouldn't have to go to Midtown. We shouldn't have to go downtown to put on our place or to show our music or to show our art. And now here we have a significant group of Black artists. And people in the Black cultural world saying Yes we want to join the mainstream. Now how do we deal with this? Has, have things change? Is there a change in philosophy? What really is behind this development?

Linda Bryant 00:06:42.580
I'm really glad you brought that out because that was of the things that I first thought of when I went on the venture of a commercial gallery. Actually I had had first conceived of the gallery being in Manhattan, but in a Broadway 86 Street area not in Midtown, choosing an area that would not lend itself to psychological stereotypes which often happens when we deal in institutions which couldn't be placed with a title or, or a stigma, a storefront, or primarily community or other such phrases it didn't also become condescending. After I thought about it and I thought about the reasons for the gallery, I said well look maybe I should go to 57th Street and investigates spaces. Now I find myself with the space on 57th Street. I was terrified at first. I said, "Oh wow, what are the artists gonna say", because a great number of the artists that I'm dealing with if you take someone like David Hammons who for the most part is a socio-political artist with his body prints, or someone like Valerie Maynard who has always been dedicated to, to the community, and said, "Oh what will the reaction be?" So I at that point started to call up artists. I'm finding in terms of Afro-American artists that there has been not a change in philosophy, not a change in communication or dedication to the community, but rather a change in attitude in terms of being limited. I think they also realize the stereotypes. They also realize the kind of boxes that places them in. And so there at this point saying, "Hey, we have a message not only for the Black community, but the Black community through us, as a vehicle, has a message to the world".

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:16.450
I think there is something behind that because having established galleries and I just happened to mention two, but the I think Tom Lloyd has a gallery in Queens, and some of the artists have a gallery in Brooklyn. There's a gallery over at the Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation.

Linda Bryant 00:08:33.071
S.K. Gallery.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:34.001
And we have established the fact that, yes, we are viewing art in our own community. And part of the power dynamics of a pluralistic society is to let the other folks know what you have and give them an opportunity to buy and ultimately to compute, to compete, in a somewhat of a free market. We know that so long as there's racism in the society we don't have the free market that hopefully will have. On the other hand, if you remember your history, during the Harlem Renaissance it became very chick for many white art connoisseurs to purchase and display Black art. And it is certainly possible that some of this fantastic art and later on in the program might want to talk about the nature of some of the art. Some of this fantastic art begins to be viewed by people in the larger community. I think it might well have not only significant economic effects, but also significant cultural effects because just as our music has permeated the world of advertising and the world of the movies, et cetera, so well might our art and, of course, historically we know that the art of some of the French Impressionists is really African art almost just picked up in toto, with some developments by some talented people such as Picasso. But how do you view that?Do you see this as an addition to being a business venture, a kind of educational venture?

Linda Bryant 00:10:04.510
Definitely. I think anytime that we deal with the arts of an ethnic group and specifically in my case the Afro American art, that it has to be educated. It has to be educated to the people, to the community that it addresses itself from, to and from which it evolves, and also has to be educated for the larger total society that is illuminated it throughout the years.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:26.111
Well talk about, let's talk about some of the art, not necessarily some of the artists, although you probably can't really talk about the art without talking about the artist, but do you tend to focus on prints? Do you tend to focus on oils, waters, sculpture? What, what do you tend to include in your gallery?

Linda Bryant 00:10:44.050
Okay fine. Because of the lack of this type of venture, I've had not to, I have not been able to just say it would be a print gallery, or a painting gallery, or a sculpture gallery, or if it's a photographic gallery. But what I'm doing, uh, is setting up a gallery that will present, uh, painting, sculpture and also prints. This will span a scale stylistically from mainstream, considerations done by Afro-American artists through socio- political types of concerns. It also spanned a historic range from older Black artists, the pioneers of Afro-American art, those who produced during the Harlem Renaissance who have not since then, or even then, at any great scale been able to promote their works on a large scale to the public and also those who are contemporary artists that have been producing in the last 10 to15 years.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:33.780
Now you use the term mainstream, and I have an idea of what you mean by mainstream art, but I'd like you to indicate to our audience what you mean by mainstream art and also you use socio-political art. Uh, one I see as sort of a form and the other I see as sort of a content. There are. How do you mean it?

Linda Bryant 00:11:54.030
OK, well mainstream art, for the most part, is that art that is being produced by the major art, art producers. Let's say it would be that non-objective art, it would be art that is mostly concerned with color and form. Art that is falling into the Western trends, you know, be it pop, be it futurism, be it minimal art. Now the whole big, whole big new thing in mainstream art or Western art is conceptual art. So it'll be those Black artists that are dealing in that kind of frame.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:23.711
You made it what might have been a Freudian slip. You use mainstream and Western synonymously.

Linda Bryant 00:12:28.724
Laughter.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:29.980
Do you really mean that mainstream art is only Western or is mainstream art also Asian?

Linda Bryant 00:12:37.480
No, I think for all practical purposes in terms of promotions and sale mainstream art is, is Western.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:43.360
Particularly in the West.

Linda Bryant 00:12:44.611
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:45.340
I imagine if you go to Bangkok, or you go to Bombay, or Peking, or Tokyo, I would be mucho surprised if they consider Western not to be the art.

Linda Bryant 00:13:02.170
No, I wouldn't, no, I wouldn't say that they necessarily would say it would be the art, but you must recognize it also in Asian countries and African countries as well, that a lot of, a lot of the contemporary art being produced does mirror that art that has been coming out in the Western market.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:13:17.510
All right now the other part of your continuum of socio-political life that might, that as I said seen it relate to content rather than form.

Linda Bryant 00:13:25.210
Right. Well, socio-political art especially done by Afro-American artists deals with the Black experience. It makes statements about that experience and it also makes statements about that experience in a Western society. So what you might have is a body print by David Hammons of, by Bobby Seals, a Black man with his hands tied behind a chair. What you might have are the works of Africa where that deal specifically with the use of not only the visual aspects, but the verbal aspects in the works that denote some kind of positive phrase, dealing with the Afro-American experience and making a statement against the society that we live in, in terms of our own experiences with injustice.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:03.171
Well let me ask this. Doesn't any art reflect one's experience?

Linda Bryant 00:14:10.561
I think art reflects a certain experience. I think Western art or mainstream art reflects an experience that is produced from the controllers of Western societies. I think in terms of Afro-American art and it was a question that came up again in the 60s. It was kind of, it was a question that also was dealt with in a Harlem Renaissance, when black artists said, "Hey, we're gonna start to do things about ourselves". I think that certain ethnic groups within the major societies in the West have statements they draw out their own experiences and I think that when you talk about socio-political or Black art even some people today will say that Black art is only that art which is dealing with the Black experience, the uniqueness of that experiences, uh, experience from street corners. So you take someone like sewers Quest who has Black people on street corners say hey he, he spans the range of what Black people might do, you know from prostitutes to pushers to...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:06.872
Street corner preachers.

Linda Bryant 00:15:07.771
Yes, right. Street corner preachers type of thing. That some people I said would say that this was what Black art was, and it wasn't like the type of things that Sam Gilliam or Fred Eversley were doing when they're trying to deal primarily in mainstream or non-content, or non statement type of words.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:25.001
That is an interesting dichotomy that artists frequently draw between themselves which I personally completely understand, because as you say all art reflects one's experience, possibly the choice of colors, or the choice of form reflects your experience, which in the case of most Blacks is a very oppressive experience, and I tend to see this in terms of literality of the art. For example, if it is literally, you know a picture of a Black being oppressed by a white or a Black responding to a white, people tend to say it's socio-political. On the other hand, if the choice of color, the choice of form is one that reflects that internal rejection of oppression, they say it's not socio-political. Now how do you deal with that the apparent inconsistency?

Linda Bryant 00:16:16.870
Okay first I'll say this. The artists themselves seem to be dealing with it. I think a lot of the artists are realizing that if you go back to the roots, if you go back to Africa, that most of the things are very abstract. They deal heavily with color and color combinations, shapes and forms, so you have a lot of Afro-American artists now that are going into that, but not from a Western perspective, but from studying the African traditions and coming up with someone like Joe Overstreet who has huge canvases of color and form that he actually derived from his studies through African, through African culture. So I think they are arriving at that point now. I don't know if it's an excuse for a rationale at this point or if it's just a natural kind of, of going into to our actual roots and finding what it's all about.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:58.860
Of course, some have said that socio-political art really isn't very good art in many instances because of the attempt to be too literal. Is that a valid criticism?

Linda Bryant 00:17:09.060
No, I don't think so. I think it was a criticism that first originated. I mean in my mind and in my studies with whites who were saying, well this is propaganda and propaganda art is not good. And it's poster art. And I think the argument for that is if you take someone like Picasso, if you take Guernica, which is definitely a statement against the war, which is, is praised as probably one of the best pieces ever done.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:30.213
Nowadays. Right.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:30.217
How was it when it first projected, because I do recall, that in many instances white artists who use social protest themes found the same basic conflict or basic criticism. It was alleged that this really isn't very good art and what really was being responded to is that whoever was evaluating it didn't like the message or the emotional content of the art. So that's a dilemma. I think that artists of all shapes and colors and backgrounds will continue to face, and I guess the thing that some people might be concerned about as you move into selling art and trying to reach out to the art consuming public, is that maybe these very strident protest artists might diminish their stridency in order to sell their paintings. Because frequently it's a criticism of strident writers. And how do you feel about that? Do you think that might happen, or do you think that much of the revolutionary fervor will continue among the Black artists? I think in terms of producing honestly what the artist feels, be it a work that has a literal message, or a work that has a visual message primarily through an abstract form. I think that it will be maintained, the honesty of that production be maintained and Afro-American artists, I can say just from my talks, without it so far, like they've always like with their own preconceived notions of what galleries are about, or their past experiences with, with other types of galleries. You're saying, "Hey, like if red and blue and purple selling this week, don't expect me to just keep doing that if I want to move on to something else". Now when it comes down to economics and they're produced, even when they're shown well, "Hey, I can sell this for five thousand dollars." Why don't you do a couple more purple, blue and green ones. Now we'll have to see how that really counts, but I think that there is a sincerity to produce honestly. I'm always amazed at the number of Picassos I find in people's homes. That if you really looked at the work, you really wouldn't feel it was particularly sensational, but it has that little initial down there, or it's a print it has the number the print, and as a result, it keeps people going. Let's talk about Linda Bryant. Just how did you get interested in this venture? Are you a practicing artist yourself or are you looking at it from a standpoint of an art historian, art critic or are you just an intelligent entrepreneur? Well it is certainly obvious as we hear you talk. I think it probably originated from a culmination of all of that. I started out as a painter, with the intentions of coming to New York and making it. What does making it mean by the way?Making it in New York I guess, getting in a gallery and selling well, so you can survive off of that slowly. Now that's very interesting because there are some people who said making it has to do with getting recognition from one's peers. And we know that some of the revolutionary artists to have that great recognition from their peers, but also have not been particularly successful commercially. So you sort of combine the two. You want to get the accolades of your peers, at the same time you want to sell some art. That's right. And certainly that's not to be criticized. It's a particular point of view, but so many young people come to New York in the field of the arts, in theater, in dance, in the visual arts to, as they say, make it. And I, I always wonder what their view of making it is. You know, the classic, is your name in lights on Broadway? So that was one of your motivations... Right, I think so. For coming to New York et cetera? Now how did that evolve into Linda Bryant stepping out to start the Just Above Midtown Gallery on 57th Street? OK, well actually. Well that idea actually happened in Atlanta before I moved here a couple of years ago. And in moving, in flight I decided that it was essential that we begin to develop critics in Afro-American art and that at the same time I could continue painting, but it was necessary that I focus on that. So I came in with the intention to continue study in art history and got into museology. From there, I got several fellowships and ended up with the Rockefeller Fellowship which started last year, which gave me a very good view of the art, the art, the art industry, the art business, what it's all about, from the creative aspects all the way up to the selling aspects, concentrating in museums. From there, being always interested in and concentrating my attentions to Afro-American art and doing studies in that, I began to focus on that and I went to Studio Museum in Harlem and somewhere around last spring, in my travels here in New York, and just thinking about the experiences I had had and then making a trip to the West Coast and talking with artists, it occurred to me that a very sad thing was happening and that was that meaning an incredible artist, be they ethnic, be they whatever, without all the classifications, they're really just incredible artists, are walking the streets, pushing their work under their arms or they're, or they're doing things like working in Burger Kings or they're teaching school or whatever. There's always some other distraction beside the main purpose of their being here and that is to produce art and I came back to New York and walked in the Studio Museum one day and looked at Valerie and say. "Dammit I'm going to start a gallery". And it was just I think, it was just out of that, it was almost an emotional kind of response at first like this has to be done and it has to be an outlet so that artists can survive in doing what they really want to do. What kind of support are you getting? Reactions, the emotional support, financial support, etc.. In terms of the gallery, the concept in and the fact that it's an incredible idea that should work, I'm getting extremely positive support from the Black artist, from museum people, both downtown museums, as well as uptown museums. I'm getting incredible support from corporations, architectural firms, possible buyers, private collectors that are interested in seeing this. In terms of financial support, that's a struggle. It always is a struggle for the arts, and particularly in the first days of any particular gallery. I gather your opening is projected for the first part of November. That's right. Do you have a date for that yet or is that contingent on some of the physical arrangements for the gallery? It's contingent right now. It has first been stated November 4th, but in terms of getting the right ads in, in magazines and papers and getting a catalog together, artists do have a tendency to be slow in sending in certain things like slides and biographical materials. It might have to be pushed to the 15th because of printer dates. All right. And if anyone in our audience is interested either in attending the opening or projecting some assistance of a variety of types I'm sure you can use some volunteer assistance... Oh, of course. As well as some financial support. How might they get in touch with you? They can contact me at 595-4551, most any evening and on weekends. 595-4551. That's Linda Bryant for service or information about the Just Above Midtown Gallery. Is there an address that they might write to you at? They can write to the 50 West 57th street address or they can write at 126 Riverside Drive. 50 West 57th Street or... 126 Riverside Drive. I see because I am sure that as a result of what you're doing, talking in the art world and appearing on programs like this, etc., there will be a tremendous response. There certainly will be a great anticipation of what's going to happen in the gallery. Who are some of the artists other than those we mentioned at the top of the show who will be showing in the gallery? OK. Other artists, hopefully to be included will be artists like Camille Billops, Vivian Browne, an artist on the West Coast by the name of RoHo. I hope also right now, I'm still trying to get confirmations on, on the older artists in Afro-American art. I hope to be handling people like Palmer Hayden, like Archibald Motley, like Ellis Wilson and Norman Lewis. Now let me ask this. When you handle an artist or you show an artist 's work, is that an exclusive or can an artist show in your gallery as well as someone else's gallery? All right. Presently it really works in terms of the art market that it's a gentlemen's agreement type of, type of understanding where the... Gentlemen's, gentlewomen's or gentleperson's? Well they call it a gentlemen's agreement where the artists will agree to work exclusively with the gallery in that area. Now that doesn't mean an artist in New York with the New York gallery couldn't have a West Coast gallery. It works basically on that kind of arrangement, for persons, ah, purposes of my gallery, it'll be a basic agreement that deals with the types of percentage the gallery will get with gallery's responsible for him with the artist who's responsible for and hopefully the respect that an artist wouldn't show immediately in New York without first advising the gallery. Now what about art from, let's say Africa. Suppose someone has some contacts with significant African artists. Should they contact you to see if you might be interested... Most definitely. In showing their work because I personally have met some very wonderful artists from Africa because both the distance and the fact that they are unfamiliar with the art world, many of them have great difficulty having their work shown, yet there's some very sensational work many times. That's right. I'm very interested in that type of information, also anyone who has information from or about Caribbean artists as well. All right as we come to the close of our program, could you briefly indicate just what you hope will come out of this venture? Hopefully, It's projected that the gallery will go in to branches throughout the country and also throughout the world. Hopefully, in the next three to five years, we'll have a Los Angeles branch, from that, five to seven years a Midwestern branch, from that, seven to nine years a European branch. It's not going to be just localized on the East Coast. It's not that intention at all. Will you be publishing books, or pictures of some of your art for sale, once you really get developed? That's right. Slides, and I also hope that the gallery will be able to undertake a venture that has not been undertaken before and that's to do a complete Afro-American art catalog where it would be a major resource center for Afro-American artists. If you want to know about any artist, any works he's done, where those works are located at presently. You come to this gallery and get that type of information. Well, you certainly have told us a lot about the Just Above Midtown Gallery and some of the things that you hope will be happening in the world of Afro-American art. I'd like to thank you, Linda Bryant, Director of the Just Above Midtown Gallery for being a guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason". Thank you. You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

