Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.290
Black theater probes the conscience, the mores, the racism and the sickness in our society. BLACK PICTURE SHOW by Bill Gunn scores a bull's eye on all these counts. Hear him discuss the themes and the meaning of this new hit play on tonight's SOUL OF REASON. [intro music begins]

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:39.221
This is SOUL OF REASON: a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:05.710
With us this evening on SOUL OF REASON is Bill Gunn, playwright and director of the new hit play, BLACK PICTURE SHOW, which is now at the Vivian Beaumont Theater. Glad to have you with us tonight on SOUL OF REASON, Bill.

Bill Gunn 00:01:17.680
It's good to be here.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:19.150
Now this play has gotten all type of really outstanding reviews. Black reviewers, white reviewers, and everyone who talks about the play, speaks in terms of thoughtfulness, in terms of penetration, in terms of theme analysis, character development. And very briefly for our audience, maybe you can sketch out what you perceive as the main theme of the play rather than my saying "I perceive," or what the critics perceive, what do you perceive? Because you wrote it and also, as we we're going to talk about later, you directed it. What about it?

Bill Gunn 00:01:54.940
Well people tend to look at the play and kind of ... you know ... a man coming to a point in his life where he makes some sort of racial discovery. But it's not that at all. To me the character -- the central character of Alexander -- was a man who had come to the point of his life where ... the middle part of his life... where he suddenly let go of everything. He let go of everything he had learned; everything he'd understood, you know, and in a sense was beginning to die. So it became a very personal play, you know. It had nothing to do with all of us, you know, but it was so true (or it is so true to me) about one of us, that of course it connects with all of us, you know.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:34.650
Well I talked in the opening about the conscience and the mores, the racism and the sickness of a society. And in a sense as this idea of BLACK PICTURE SHOW... this Alexander's son, J.D. -- what do you call him? Jesus Delivers?

Bill Gunn 00:02:51.281
Jesus Delivers, yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:52.541
Is in a sense trying to sum up what has happened to his father. And in a sense what he's really saying is what's happened to us.

Bill Gunn 00:03:00.101
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:00.611
What's happened to our society. And it plays back and forth between, you know, the pseudo realities of what he was doing and also the actual reality of his being in Bronx State Hospital. And to me that raises a question: ... is ... did you intend to suggest that maybe he was sick or maybe the society was sick, or maybe it was a combination of both?

Bill Gunn 00:03:23.260
Well, we would say the society had made him sick.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:26.230
Well that's... that's true. That is the truth. People aren't generally born sick... very, very few people are born sick; just like they're not born prejudiced.

Bill Gunn 00:03:33.710
...been poisoned by it, you know. And of course this is part of the thing that he's letting go. He's a professional. You know, in his professional life, he's a director, a writer, you know, and he's very good, you know. He makes very good films and... but his films don't make any money, but he... he... he loves what he does. He does... he's done everything out of a kind of organic need to do it, and he's... and he's brilliant, you see. But suddenly he has to let go of everything, you know. And this is what it's like. I did a film called GANJA & HESS, and there was a song in it which was a one line song: you've got to know when to let go, you've got to know when it's over, you know. And a man who's suddenly, by the age of 40, had had everything: had a grown son -- a mistake he'd made when he was 15 years old -- had gone through some success [CROSSTALK] almost as old as he was, he was only 15 years older than he was. So you had two men, you know, making extraordinary, extraordinary demands on each other you know, which is interesting.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:33.640
And a son in a sense saying, well why don't you join the establishment ...

Bill Gunn 00:04:36.431
Yes... survive...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:36.435
...and make [CROSSTALK] out of this. And he saying I have to develop my art... I have to develop myself.

Bill Gunn 00:04:42.361
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:42.791
And then what happens.... Of course this is a theme that is broader than blackness.

Bill Gunn 00:04:49.070
Yeah it just expands.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:49.421
Blackness does make it the BLACK PICTURE SHOW, but it's a theme that practically every artist has gone through. I would say a number of intellectuals go through; certainly sports figures go through.

Bill Gunn 00:05:01.651
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:02.351
Who am I? What am I? Where am I going?

Bill Gunn 00:05:04.750
And of course you know everything... because people say why is it important that he be Black? And I say because everything that we play out, we play out in huge terms. I mean you know we aren't allowed the subtlety of the experience that whites are.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:18.340
You can't hustle on the side and make it...

Bill Gunn 00:05:20.021
...no ...no...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:20.531
...and still be a valued intellectual. You're probably going to starve a long time.

Bill Gunn 00:05:24.870
So our life, you know... our lives are... is theater. You know, we live theater constantly. You know we get the stares, the jibes and the insults and you know and everything. But it comes out of this... like... great huge theatrical experience, you see.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:39.950
In a sense I said on a program many times that the Black movement is the conscience of our entire American society.

Bill Gunn 00:05:47.661
Oh yes... yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:47.664
And to a certain extent the conscience of the world: for example what's happening in Africa in the Sahel... and the famine ... what's happening in the United Nations... all of these things tend to cause the white world, or should cause the white world and certainly probably does cause the white world, to pause and say well look what are our values? Where are we? And we see so much decadence around us ... you see political decadence... you see social decadence... you see artistic decadence. And when you try to stand up for this, you know, people say "Why?" and somehow or another when it's Black, it projects in such bolder strokes.

Bill Gunn 00:06:27.920
We're like the universal blotter, you know. We suck all of this up, you see. And I was trying to break things down for myself and I was discovering a kind of ... the result of everything... and had ended up in the Black man, you know. He carried the, you know, the result of the entire mistake of the European civilization was resting right in him. And of course the American Black, because America is the result of everything, right? This is what everybody wants to be, you see, so that ... it put a lot on my hero's shoulders suddenly because he was the intellectual, you know, he was a man who was willing to accept the burden and express himself, you know, as an artist, you know, but yet was very clear about his his work and his life, you see.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:17.830
That's very interesting. I wonder how many Black artists -- writers, musicians, poets --really go through this experience. Is it sort of a universal experience that Black creative people go through? Or is it something that some go through and some don't?

Bill Gunn 00:07:39.410
Well it's... I think, I think if you ... one ... if one is an artist and one is Black, one is going through it, but the one... the thing is ... is coming out the other side and looking back and discovering what it's all... what it all has been ... what it's all about. But I don't think it can be avoided. I think of course it happens in different levels some with some people it's much more subtle, with others it's more dramatic, you know; with others it's worth their lives, you know. But if one is not going through it, then one should check ... find out if one is an artist and if he is not, obviously something's not ... not really there.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:08:15.410
I would concur. We have many writers and playwrights, poets, musicians on the show and practically everyone goes through this. It's kind of an identity ... personality ... career crisis that comes up over and over again. And I can't help but remember when Virginia Capers was on the show right after she had made it in RAISIN, she said well this is something that I've worked for all of my life and this is my moment and I'm going to live through it and enjoy it and not change and be myself because this is my way of expressing myself and my art at that point. And I think in your case with you... -- you've done some outstanding work on films and plays and so on -- to get the type of response to BLACK PICTURE SHOW that you have gotten, certainly must be gratifying.

Bill Gunn 00:09:07.620
Oh I love it. I love it.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:10.010
I'm kind of amused at some of the reviews, in that some of the reviewers -- particularly some of the white reviewers -- don't exactly know what to make of it. They know it's great. They know it's penetrating and it's almost as though they're standing outside of the arena looking in. Now, a reviewer is doing that at almost any play.

Bill Gunn 00:09:29.121
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:29.781
But I imagine particularly with people who have not been that close to the Black experience, it is a little frightening to try to evaluate.

Bill Gunn 00:09:39.474
They find all kinds of other sort of, you know, ways to relate to it; which is nice. Actually the man, Gottlieb, in the POST, you know, he was very specific and he was... he was one... he was very flattering, but he was very clever about the play...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:09:57.111
Yeah I noticed that.

Bill Gunn 00:09:57.382
...you know, very clever. You know he doesn't... you see... he wasn't operating as a white man looking at a Black play -- somehow he seemed to have missed that in his in his enthusiasm about the play -- he sort of missed that experience. Most of the others are. They're sort of looking at this exotic thing taking place down there. And if they try to connect it to their own lives, or through their own reason, and sometimes the response is very violent in kind of a negative way, you see. But it's up to me to preserve, you know, what I'm doing to see it is that. You know there's so much to understand about where these responses come from.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:30.630
Of course that's a healthy development of you as an artist and

Bill Gunn 00:10:32.752
I imagine it's taken a lot of struggle... ...Oh yes, it's necessary...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:32.755
...to deal with that because in dealing with the artistic world -- which is basically white and to a certain extent racist -- to maintain your own integrity as an artist and to be able to accept criticism some of which is legitimate and some of which isn't.

Bill Gunn 00:10:51.190
You can't even deal with integrity. I mean you can't bring the word up in certain circles, but you find that you are so cemented within yourself about what you feel and what you will do and what you won't do, do you know, that it never is a contest. And, you know, because the people are going to carry on, you know, they're going to carry on terribly... they're gonna grab you and humiliate you and overpay you and underpay you...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:17.800
... and over flatter you...

Bill Gunn 00:11:19.460
...and over flatter you, you know, and destroy you -- so you know they're gonna do that. So if you can get through -- the problem is to get through to the other side, you see. And all the situations where the Black artist is just devoured, you know. It takes a little flattery, you know, because we've been without so much for so long. And unfortunately recognition from our own people comes last. You know a poet in your own line, you see.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:44.531
Always.

Bill Gunn 00:11:48.160
I mean all this wonderful Black money in this country. I mean the whole thing could be changed totally overnight, you know. But so it's... it's... it's... it's just a matter of surviving, you know.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:57.790
You know you mentioned that word exotic that so many of the critics and the people who view Black plays... Black drama... Black dance... use the term exotic...

Bill Gunn 00:12:08.130
Yes, they do.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:08.134
And I couldn't help but think back to the Harlem Renaissance when Carl Van Vechten was dealing with Blacks, and Black theater, and Black photography, and Black art and so frequently, particularly in this book which is called NIGGER HEAVEN, he wrote about the exotic nature of the Black life. That in a sense says something, because... I guess, one man's "exorcism" [laughter] is another man's reality. And I think what it really deals with is that many, many white people -- probably most -- really don't understand the reality of Black life. They don't understand [CROSSTALK] the depth and reality of racism. They don't understand the fact that many of the ways, in which we as Blacks, live and act and interact is a direct function of the racism that we've been exposed to. And in addition, a different culture -- an African culture ... background -- which approaches the interaction between people possibly a little bit more openly. I would think that's one of the things that we deal with. And that gets into the question of the language. I noticed several of the reviewers and some of the folks that have seen the play, have talked about the sharpness of the dialogue and the openess of the language. Is this something that you took extra steps to develop in some type of picturesque fashion, or is this something that you perceive as just a normal evolution of looking at the Black lifestyle?

Bill Gunn 00:13:43.690
Well I might say I took steps not to disrupt what was coming out of me. Joe Papp once said, when he first saw the script, he said I know what all that language is it's rage, you know. Well he brought it right down to what it was: it was rage. Words don't mean anything, you know. I mean people get very upset about four letter words and that ... that doesn't impress me. I think it's it's a bigger act than people that don't get upset about it. You know it's covering up something and I'm not going to be concerned less with that but it's very interesting what happens to a man at that point in his life when he begins to use language like that. That's a very important part of his insanity. You know that that he's going through. I've been in... especially one situation where a man was sitting at a table going mad in front of his wife at a dinner party I was at, and he really was. And he began to tell stories and every five words there was a four letter word and he would apologize and use a four letter word in the apology... apology. I mean it was just pouring out of him you know and we should have known then. But it's that's what it's about in the play and I wouldn't disturb that world.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:57.810
One of the analogies that came after one of the reviews was Edward Albee's ...VIRGINIA WOOLF?

Bill Gunn 00:15:03.641
Well anybody that insults anybody at a dinner party nowadays has to deal with Edward Albee.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:09.780
Anybody who's seen Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor playing the roles...

Bill Gunn 00:15:12.453
That's right. Just come in from supper and say... and insult you, and it's Edward Albee.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:16.720
Tonight on SOUL OF REASON we are talking with Bill Gunn, the author and director of the hit play BLACK PICTURE SHOW which is now at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center. Bill you are both the author... the playwright.... and the director; and of course this puts, in a sense, an extra pressure on you. On one hand you wrote the play and you know what you expected, or were trying to project. On the other hand you're working with a very, very talented group of actors and actresses who have their interpretation of it. Now did you find any extra pressure on you in this dual role as both playwright and director, or not?

Bill Gunn 00:16:00.330
I found the pressure on the actors, you see. Because I pretty well knew what I was doing from the beginning, because I had to, in order to step out there. But they were always aware that they were dealing with episodes of my life, you see. Some were true, some were not; but whatever, they had grown out of each other so they... they were very sensitive to that, and they were very... sometimes very frightened by it, you know.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:24.260
In other words they were holding back, or they didn't exactly know how to interact around...?

Bill Gunn 00:16:36.410
Well they didn't know how... I think... how to treat me -- I don't really know how to respond to that. But finally the result was to just do whatever I wanted. And as time went by we began to really enjoy ourselves. You know actresses would come to me and say I've never had an experience like this in rehearsal in my life you know. And it was things that they were doing or allowing themselves to do you know. So we spent we spent the whole of last summer working on it on the play.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:16:57.590
Well you have some talented people.

Bill Gunn 00:16:59.931
They're incredible.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:00.531
Dick Williams... Dick Anthony Williams and Albert Hall, Carol Cole who have done some other really exciting things but in this they really come right to the fore and it's as though you are really sitting in on this experience...

Bill Gunn 00:17:16.280
...and also Sam Waymon who wrote the music [CROSSTALK] for the production and he's just incredible.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:22.270
Now that's another interesting thing about Black theater. So much of the new Black theater relies very heavily on the music and interaction between the music and the action. One play that comes to mind is Melvin Van Peebles' AIN'T SUPPOSED TO DIE A NATURAL DEATH where almost the entire play was dependent upon the interaction there. But in other plays, even a more recent Woodie King play, PRODIGAL SISTER has a great dependence on music. And it's suggested that this is just a natural development in terms of the fact that music and dance has been so much a part of the Black experience. Is that really the reason why you did this or did you do this for a particular kind of effect?

Bill Gunn 00:18:09.650
Well it sort of came to me that I never turn the music off, from the time I go in the door till the time I go to sleep or till I leave. And it's a very important part of my life, you know. I once had a friend of mine that complained about... he just... well he couldn't...he didn't mind terribly about going... visiting white people, but their houses were too quiet... [laughter] it's so quiet in their homes, you know. And I said, well that's... that music is constantly going -- no matter what I'm going through -- what I'm dealing with. And that's... that's the reason why... that of course out of it you realize later, ah well, you've done a very Black thing, you see. Because we tend to deal on this level.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:47.721
That's really interesting because I think many of us go through the same experience. As you mentioned that, I realized it's sort of a reality of my own life and the lives of my friends and even many of the offices in which we work. We'll have a station that plays the music that we like: it might be older music, or jazz music, or younger music, or what have you. But it's there. In a sense you say it's just sort of the backdrop of a Black life.

Bill Gunn 00:19:13.430
Exactly. It's like, you know,... it's the backdrop of my kitchen and my bedroom too which I think is wonderful.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:20.060
Now in... the idea that you had mentioned earlier about Black people... the Black economic resource... contributing to the development of Black theater, is a very important one. Many of the playwrights and producers -- most recently Woodie King -- on the show were talking about this. And yet there seems to be so much difficulty of getting money out of the Black community to support Black theater and in a sense support Black dance.

Bill Gunn 00:19:49.251
Well it seems... Well, we don't... we don't...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:53.080
What is the reason for this and how can we get around it? That's one of the things we want to deal with.

Bill Gunn 00:19:54.381
Well, our millionaires... we have very few intellectual millionaires. We have very few ... uh ... liberal millionaires. Our millionaires are very conservative men and women, do you know. And I think art still suffers its old crucifixion. No matter what color.. it does... I mean it's... I mean one is going to have to find a Black Rockefeller who down through some line of somewhere will end up with some great art center like Lincoln Center or something. But we haven't found that person yet who is that ... you know ... who, you know... we haven't been rich long enough, I guess, to be that interested in tradition, you know, or in our... in our art. I find that when I'm even dealing with just making... raising money just to make a commercial movie which... out of which people will make millions, then there's still that distrust... there's still that, you know...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:46.941
Now you use an interesting word. You use the word distrust.

Bill Gunn 00:20:50.100
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:04.960
Now that gets into several things: is it a question of the unwillingness of Blacks who have some money...discretionary money... to invest it in a way that involves some risk or risk taking? Or...

Bill Gunn 00:21:04.963
It's not so much risk... It's not so much risk...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:10.580
... or is it that they don't trust the artistic integrity of the product? What do you think it is?

Bill Gunn 00:21:11.460
It's not so much risk. I think there's a lack of respect for the idea in the first place. I don't think, you know... I think when you're dealing with moneys for a film ... people who have millions and they're looking for a tax shelter anyway, you know, and they decide not to. That has something to do with something else.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:30.661
That has something to do with the trust of the art.

Bill Gunn 00:21:33.221
With the trust of the art... of the respect. I mean you can go to them... I mean I can go to them... I can drag out credentials, you know, that are unbelievable but that... that has nothing to do with it. I think that someday along will come a personality who will change that and we'll do something you know rather exquisite... finally, you know. But we're all going to... to the white people until that happens.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:21:55.170
Well it has been suggested that groups like Black churches and Black social units...

Bill Gunn 00:22:00.420
Yes, they have a lot of money...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:01.290
...Black unions might invest some of their money in development of theater and film and...

Bill Gunn 00:22:07.990
There's a lot of money to be made. A lot of money to be made.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:09.570
... there's money to be made and also there is, in a public service sense, a development of people. It's true that much of our art has been indigenous and it has been informal and it has followed the folkways -- certainly our music... our music through the churches, certainly much of our dance -- but in a sense, theater is a little bit more formal. You have to pay union scale to get your stage hands and then get your electricians and...

Bill Gunn 00:22:37.561
I like the films actually. They're my favorite. [CROSSTALK]

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:42.220
... every electric plug you need a new union. But the point is it does require a fairly substantial and organized sum of money. On the other hand is it not possible that groups of not so wealthy people might merge their resources around some of these creative projects? Is it so risky that maybe they shouldn't get into it? Or is it again a state of mind?

Bill Gunn 00:23:11.580
Well there's... there's... there's the decent project and the indecent project, you know. I think it's a wonderful idea. It would have to be behind some producer that is reputable who the people trusted and had the taste to pick out the filmmaker that would make all their dreams come true. But I think first... I think that you've got to have a couple of rich people who throw out a couple of good movies, make some money, and set up the idea so that people can begin to operate out of it. The Black film industry now seems to have taken a dip. [CROSSTALK] But I think... it's... it's only... it's only... it's only bored. It's not dead, you see.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:47.822
Well not only that, much of the Black film industry was based on sort of a soggy... sort of a quagmire. [CROSSTALK] So you take a white Frankenstein and make a Black Frankenstein; [CROSSTALK] you have a white Dracula and you make a Black Dracula, and you show people, you know, beating up white people, and running the revolution, and you... and you've got Black movies and that really isn't what it's all about because there's so many [CROSSTALK]...

Bill Gunn 00:24:11.441
They were novelty movies. They call them novelty movies, you know. And that was nice, you know.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:17.850
It gave a few people some work.

Bill Gunn 00:24:18.871
Yeah, yeah. And a lot of people... Black people learn a lot about film. Now we should make some movies. [CROSSTALK] That's right, you know.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:26.130
And of course the so-called white movie industry went through this for a long period of time. And for a period I think you'd have to say that Black movies really saved Hollywood. Certainly a film like SHAFT certainly put MGM back into business and a few other films did the work. But as you suggest now we need to get down to the serious business of making serious movies about a whole spectrum of things.

Bill Gunn 00:24:53.390
It could be so easy. I mean you know it's so easy to start a Black film industry. All it would need is a lot of clever, very rich people and a little bit of good taste, do you know, and knowledge about what it's all about, do you know. Because it's so simple... it is so simple. And I don't know why it can't happen because I guess because of the thing... because, I think they...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:18.270
You know it will happen. And one of the reasons it will happen is because of... just what's going on here. I mean the dialogues that we're having -- and being heard by thousands of people -- probably up and down the East Coast, and all of a sudden someone says gee there's an idea there's a germ there. Let's just get in touch with Bill Gunn. Let's check out what's happening because you have to dream the dream. And again this probably is part of what is in BLACK PICTURE SHOW. You've got to have that dream that's out there.

Bill Gunn 00:25:45.910
Yes... yes...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:46.382
And some way of continuing to struggle to it, without letting happen to us what's happened to Alexander -- that it just drives you mad.

Bill Gunn 00:25:56.950
Yeah. Some people would say, well you know, the play reminds me of THE BIG KNIFE, you know, where that experience was kind of spelled out about the white -- you know -- star in Hollywood. And I said well yes, all right; but we we have to spell out our own experience, you know. It happens to us in a very individual way, you know. And, well that's what it's all about.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:20.960
Now, should any of the members of the audience be interested in checking this play out, they should contact the Vivian Beaumont Theater EN2-7618, that's EN2-7618, to make arrangements to get to the BLACK PICTURE SHOW, and I understand there are group arrangements that can be made. School... high school and college students might want to check it out. [CROSSTALK] Because it does represent something that ... through the Joe Papp's Shakespeare Festival... they are really developing a showcase -- one of the showcases of Black theater. And then of course through groups like the Black Theater Alliance there are other forums for Black theater. So there is probably I guess I'd have to say New York City is the capital of Black theater.

Bill Gunn 00:27:10.251
It is.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:10.253
It is. At least ten, fifteen, twenty theater groups operating. And I think our awareness of what theater is about and the importance of theater is certainly increasing. So that the next time we'll talk with Bill Gunn we'll be talking about what's happening in the movie industry [laughter] and how some of these folks have finally gotten themselves together so that we can do some films [CROSSTALK] that deal with our reality and I imagine that's one of the things you're thinking about. You certainly have a couple of film projects in mind.

Bill Gunn 00:27:40.470
Oh yes, I have so many things I want to do. I want to introduce the dynamics of the personal film through a Black artist in America. That's very strong.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:49.950
That's a fantastic thing. That's something we ought to have you come back and talk about it another time because so much of Black film has just been bing bang and slam around and not enough of the type of close introspective analytical projections of what all of us who are Black go through.

Bill Gunn 00:28:09.580
Yes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:28:10.380
All right I'd like to thank our guest tonight, Bill Gunn director of BLACK PICTURE SHOW for being with us and talking about this very exciting play.

Announcer 00:28:19.590
You've been listening to SOUL OF REASON with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. [outro music begins] SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

