Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.290
What happens when Black people fight racism through the courts? What guidelines does the NAACP Legal Defense Fund use in selecting cases for court suits? Hear Charles Williams, Assistant Counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, discuss these questions on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:40.071
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:06.770
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" is Charles Williams, who is an Assistant Counsel of the NAACP's Legal Defense Fund and Charles, as we begin to discuss the role of litigation in combating racism, I think it would be very interesting to do two things. One is to identify the Legal Defense Fund as an organization that is somewhat independent of the NAACP, yet related, and then also to indicate the standards or the guidelines or the criteria that the Fund uses in selecting various cases for litigation.

Charles Williams 00:01:42.020
Well first of all, actually, the fund is completely separate from the NAACP. It's a totally separate entity. The NAACP has its own legal department. Now quite often--because we both are interested in the same areas, generally civil rights litigation--we will cooperate on individual cases or join together as co-counsel in cases, but in actuality, and I guess this is something that I, that I explain over and over again because we do have the letters NAACP in our name, they are two totally separate entities.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:12.890
How did the NAACP get in the name? Is it not true that at one time they started under the overall umbrella of NAACP?

Charles Williams 00:02:21.260
That's correct. I am not really up on the exact ins and outs of how the separation occurred but I believe that that it started as a part of that legal office that I described to the NAACP and sometime, some 39 or 40 years ago, there was a division where the NAACP Legal Defense Fund was set up as a separate entity to, to continue working in the area of civil rights, but solely in the area of litigation. We are not involved in any direct action, even though we may get involved in litigation arising from direct action campaigns or what have you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:59.570
Does the fund have a separate board? And if so, who are some of the people on the board, just as a matter of interest? Because I think it's an interesting issue because frequently when you go around the country on civil rights issues and you meet someone and they say the NAACP is suing, and in fact it is the Legal Defense Fund that is conducting the suit.

Charles Williams 00:03:22.370
Yes the, the officers of the Legal Defense Fund: the President is William T. Coleman Esquire of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and the other officers include Judge Francis C. Rivers, Louis H. Pollak, Mrs. Thornburg Cowles, and Dr. George D. Cannon. And we have a rather extensive board of directors, I guess, as all nonprofit organizations tend to have, but just running through some of the names include Clifford Alexander, Junior, Wiley Branton, Mrs. Helen Buttenwieser, let's see, Ramsey Clark, Reverend William Sloane Coffin--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:00.050
These are some well-known names in the field of both civil rights, and the field of law.

Charles Williams 00:04:03.960
Yes, yes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:04.531
And of course that's what an organization like this should have as a part of its board. Now, getting into the question of the selection of cases, because the fund has litigated some really landmark cases, probably the Brown case, a Supreme Court decision eliminating segregated schools, is the most famous, but there are many others that are almost equally famous. What criteria does the fund use in selecting cases for litigation?

Charles Williams 00:04:34.550
Well, generally we try and block out areas that we'd like to get involved in, where we, from our own experience--and one thing I guess I should explain about the operation of the fund: we have approximately 20 to 25 staff lawyers working in the office in New York City and we're associated with approximately 3-to-400 what we call "cooperating attorneys," who are practicing attorneys in the field, mainly in the South but including people who are also in the North. And the way we get involved in many of our cases is our cooperating attorneys will find a problem or complain about something and tell us they would like our assistance, either in terms of technical assistance or financial assistance, in bringing certain types of litigation. And what we'll do in cooperation with our cooperating attorneys, with the staff members, with members of the legal community generally, try and come out with the areas of civil rights -- we'll block out general areas that we think are probably the most important and, practically, the most ripe for litigation. Under general headings we would include such things as education, which, school discrimination of course, segregation of schools. But since Brown, there have been other problems that have come up, such as the dismissal of students and the dismissal of faculty members. We're active, we probably have the most active employment discrimination litigation program in the country, both private under many of the employment acts and also more recently we've been involved in public employment problems. We have a project dealing in the area of the administration of justice which includes our capital punishment project. It was the NAACP Legal Defense Fund that brought and argued the suit in the Supreme Court which overturned capital punishment, even though interestingly now there probably is in excess of 30 to 40 people who've been sentenced to death since the Furman decision in 1972. We're also very much involved in prison reform cases dealing with the conditions in the prisons throughout the country.

Charles Williams 00:06:41.330
We also have been involved in municipal services, that is, let's see, getting street paving, street lighting, and making sure that Black citizens have the same types of services that are given to the majority community. That's just the general outline of the areas and what we'll try and do is, we'll try and refine from these general concepts to more specific types of cases that we'd like to be involved in. Needless to say, in terms of having 25 staff attorneys and limited finite resources, we can't get involved in every case. So what we'll look at is, well, one thing is chance of success. The importance to the community, and I guess the most important fact is the impact that the decision will have on Black people in general. We try to go beyond the case that is just important to one person, but a case that will have broad ramifications for Black people throughout the United States.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:35.990
Now I know there's something that is very popular in the legal field now, what are called class action suits, where a suit is brought on behalf of the people rather than on behalf of any individual litigant. To what extent is the Legal Defense Fund widely involved in class action, or do you tend to choose issues where there are grievances against particular people?

Charles Williams 00:08:01.430
Well generally we bring class actions. We always look toward doing this. And one thing to explain about it, when we talk about the class, sometimes there will be a class of defendants but, generally, there are limited number of defendants, a police chief, a mayor, a school board, or something of that sort. But the class is made up of those people being injured, and this is consistent with our idea of trying to bring suits that will have a broad impact and we'll mention a class of, let's say, all Black residents of the city if we're talking about municipal equalization, or all Black students attending a certain school system if we're talking about school problems. And the advantage of that is once we have a class action, the questions that the court can consider are a lot broader than when they're considering just one individual's complaint against an agency or another individual. The other good thing about it is that, in many of the cases that we bring, we get what we call remedial relief, that is the court will set up a program for future action. Now along with this program, the court normally continues jurisdiction--that means the case does not come to an end when the decision is made, the court is there to supervise, to make sure that the remedy that they've granted is actually enforced, that Black people actually receive the benefit of the decision of the court. Now when we have a class action, any member of that class, namely any Black person that falls within that class, has what we call "standing" to raise any questions or complaint about any failures on the part of the defendants, the city or whatever, to implement the plans set up by the by the court. Now if it was just an individual, there might be problems of, let's say that the individual moves from the city--for example, we have cases now that have been on the books for maybe in excess of 10 years. Now in that period, if we had five plaintiffs people die, people move away, people lose interest. When we have a class action, even if all of our plaintiffs move away from the jurisdiction, as long as that class is enforced, if any other Black person has a similar problem, or the defendants failed to implement the orders of the court we can go right into court and have standing to raise the issue.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:11.660
Now one interesting thing which is ironic, is that I read sometime recently that one of the people involved in the Brown vs. Topeka, Kansas case, which eliminated school segregation, who was going to be a pupil at that time--or was a pupil--is now a parent, and is a part of an action against the Board of Education in Topeka, Kansas because, again, a kind of resegregation pattern growing out of the neighborhood school pattern, and so on. Now in that particular instance, is she being considered as part of a class or is she actually bringing the action as an individual?

Charles Williams 00:10:48.490
I'm not familiar with that case, I can't really tell you directly but it quite possibly could be done as a member of a class. Let's say that--what you can do is you can ask for what they call "remedial relief" under the existing court order, and that's what's generally done in school desegregation cases, because school desegregation cases, when they ordered that the dual system be abolished and that a singular system come into effect, the court has broad jurisdiction to consider any problem that turns in--that could possibly demonstrate that the dual system is not being eliminated. So it's quite possible that she may, her children may be complainants under the suit that was originally brought in her name. But I'm just not sure--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:11:31.841
Now in a class action, do you have to have specific complainants or can the complaint be of a general category without naming cases and places?

Charles Williams 00:11:42.462
You would have to have at least one complainant, because you'd have to have someone--one of the questions that go into a class action is whether the named plaintiffs are representative of the class in question. For example, you could not have, let's say, I live in New York, I could not be a complainant in a case coming out of Atlanta, Georgia that was just of interest to people in Atlanta, Georgia and then claim that I was a representative of the class.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:07.330
Now an interesting thing which I've brought up with some of the attorneys at the Fund before, is the fact that there's one area of pretty obvious discrimination which would appear to fall under the Equal Employment Act, and that has to do with the discrimination against Blacks in managerial and front office positions in professional sports. For example, it's some twenty four years since Jackie Robinson first started playing Major League Baseball, there is no Black Major League Baseball manager, no Blacks in the front office. And the same thing is true in football and under the Civil Rights Act--what's that title?-- seven, I believe it is, equal employment, it would appear that since this crosses state lines and so on this is a clear violation, and a clear pattern of discrimination. Yet the Fund, for, I'm sure very specific and good reasons, has chosen not to get into that. I realize that you're not in a policymaking position, but what would you think about the possibility of something like this being a probable cause for a good and winning suit, and possibly setting up some standard that would be important? The reason why I think it's important is that sports are very visible, and this is an obvious insult and an obvious pattern of discrimination, in view the fact that over 40 percent of the players in both of those sports are Black and I think 18 out of the past 21 MVPs in the National League, at least, have been Black and a considerable number in the American League. So, again, how would you as an individual attorney on the Fund assess this, and how do you think possibly the fund might look at an issue of this type? A correlary issue is the fact that Black coaches in the previously all-Black schools in the South almost always dismissed, almost always relegated, to assistant coaching positions and of course, part of my hypothesis is that even though sports are very visible, they do not have a very high status in terms of the way in which civil rights organizations and other social groups look toward social progress. Even though the Jackie Robinson case is indicated as an example of breaking racial barriers, basically it seems to me as though the people who are in the civil rights movement are saying well, look, the sports guys got it made, let them worry about it and we'll deal with other issues. But the point I'm raising is that here is an issue which is obviously visible and at least in my opinion as obvious discrimination.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:14:47.050
So again, could you do a little talking with us about how you think this issue could be tackled and what criteria you think the Fund might use in making a decision as to whether or not to tackle it.

Charles Williams 00:15:00.280
Oh sure. Well I'll start with the second one first, because that's the easy one to answer.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:04.360
[laughs] I thought you would. [laughs]

Charles Williams 00:15:06.073
The problem of the Black coach in a newly integrated system is not unique to coaches. That was one of the areas I was mentioning when I talked about education, that there has generally been problems that we call second generation school desegregation problems, where after school systems have been integrated, that new problems that weren't foreseen at the time that the original cases were brought have arisen. And one very serious problem, one, of course, has been student dismissals, which I work with directly. But another problem we found is the dismissal of faculty members. There have been examples where there have been people who may have had 30 or 35 years' experience who were dismissed because they weren't qualified to be teachers all of a sudden after 35 years. There also have been problems of people who were administrators in Black schools who, once the schools are integrated, either aren't--administrators find themselves, and I'm not quite sure exactly why this is that, it seems like [laughs] every every Black administrator who gets a new position is in charge of discipline and attendance, not a principal, or an assistant principal or a dean, or something like that. But if they make a Black administrator an administrator it seems like he always has to be the one to go after Black children, tell them "you're out of school" or something of that sort. The Fund, and I'm sure other civil rights-related organizations, have been very active in areas like this, bringing bringing cases, and have had a considerable amount of success in putting people back into schools. Now on the question of professional sports and management, and that sort of thing. Well first of all, I should mention that I do not work directly in the title 7 project. There are specific attorneys who work on that. That's one thing I don't do, and I'm not as conversant with that area as I am with some others. But I can think of, just off the top of my head, and one thing I'd also like to make clear, this is my--I'm talking as an individual now, not as a representative of the Fund-- [crosstalk]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:02.720
Certainly, I recognize that.

Charles Williams 00:17:03.573
--that there would be certain problems, one that we're talking about individual teams, which are individual entities who make their own determinations on the structure of their front office and who they choose, as opposed to, while they have a federation or whatever you'd want to call, in terms of the American League or the National League or the NFC and the AFC, they are still--the individual organizations make their own choices, and quite often the front office is limited in terms of the number of administrative people they have there. There might be a general manager, maybe one or two, three other full-time paid administrative people. The other thing to notice is that the league offices, for whatever reason they may have done it, have been very careful in terms of having Black personnel. What is it, Monte Irvin with baseball, Buddy Young with football, and [Gardine] with basketball, which may in a sense protect the umbrella agency from any type of--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:08.431
Of course you noticed I explicitly excluded basketball--

Charles Williams 00:18:11.430
Well I can understand why--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:18:11.436
Because basketball has... because basketball has more reason and possibly 60 percent of the players are Black, but basketball does have a couple of general managers and about five Black coaches now, so there has been some progress and [Gardine] himself has some power in the executive office, whereas in baseball and football that just isn't the case.

Charles Williams 00:18:32.230
Well one thing also to point out in terms of the fact problems involved when what I was talking about in terms of them being separate entities and limited numbers of employees, the typical Title 7 case may affect thousands of employees. Most of the cases have been brought in manufacturing plants steel plants, that sort of thing, or in governmental agencies, such as cases against the police department or the fire department in New York. And one big part of the proof is statistical proof, in terms of numbers, percentages, and the conclusions you can draw from these percentages and these numbers. I think one problem we have with baseball or with football also are the limited numbers of people hired by, in administrative capacities by any team, any individual team, the type of change over that that's involved. And the fact, then, what is it that makes you decide that, let's say, an Alex Webster should be the head coach of the football Giants.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:34.001
Of course what you're really suggesting is that the criteria that might be used in deciding to litigate this tend not to favor at least extensive involvement of a group like the Fund in this. You're dealing with individuals, and you're dealing with limited numbers of people. On the other hand, looking at it from an image or even a philosophical point of view, that the impact on large numbers of Blacks when they see that their efforts at excellence are rejected at the very peak if you look at being a manager or general manager or head coach is the very peak. There might be some symbolic influence in that, but again, the Fund has limited resources and of course, as you suggest, they tend to choose courses where they might win. There is some considerable research, interesting enough, on the characteristics of managers, of active managers, come more from the infield than they do from the outfield and that disproportionately large numbers of Blacks play in the outfield and do not play second base and shortstop and third base, where there tends to be great opportunity for Blacks to move ahead. Well let's turn to another issue, which is a very, very trying issue, that has to do with the various suits that are being instituted against, in particular civil service tests, as being de facto discriminatory because the results of the tests tend to produce smaller numbers of Black applicants passing than white applicants or smaller numbers of Hispanic applicants passing than white applicants. Then the resolution of the court frequently is to come up either with quotas that say that until the test is made more fair, X number of Blacks X number of Hispanics have to be hired, or else even to suggest the way in which personnel are to be hired and among psychologists and measurement people, there is some feeling that this might not really be a good move because what's to suggest that a judge has better insight into assessing human performance than people who are trained in it. Now, what are some of the issues there, and how are some of the actions that are being taken through the Fund attempting to relate to those?

Speaker 5 00:22:05.590
Well I think the first thing to understand when you talk about civil service examination, is, I guess there are two elements that go in generally into determinations of tests being racially discriminatory. One is the fact of the impact that it's had namely the numbers of Blacks or other minority group members who have actually been successful on these exams, which, I believe that once you can show these statistics in terms of let's say percentages of population, passing rates, that sort of thing, a great deviation between a white passing rate and, let's say, a Black or Hispanic poor passing. You've come to the point of having the presumption of racial--of it being racially discriminatory. The next question--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:50.930
The test or the condition?

Charles Williams 00:22:51.991
The test, the test itself.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:22:52.881
For example, let's just take a highly technical occupation and, as we know, the overall education that Blacks are generally exposed to as a group is not equal to that of whites, which of course is part of the school desegregation situation. And if in fact it is an area that requires a very finite and high quality education, it is possible that it isn't the test that's discriminatory, but the societal conditions that have produced the poor education for the Blacks so they can't pass the test that are discriminatory. So what are you really attacking in that instance: the test, or the general societal conditions which denies that Black person the opportunity to gain the skills to pass that test?

Speaker 5 00:23:33.470
Well I think the way of looking at it is in terms of attacking the test as a, as a medium of deciding who is or is not hired, because the question then becomes, once you find that there has been this kind of broad deviation in terms of its success, is whether this test is justified, namely whether--the term of law is whether it's job related. The question would be for example if you're talking about a test of firemen. Does this test have anything to do with this applicant's ability to be a fireman, a good fireman? Or does this test have anything to do with the ability of this applicant to be a good policeman? And I think at that point--and generally the finding has been no it doesn't, so the test would have to go out and so that there would be... so they would have to accept people, and find another means of accepting them into the service.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:24:25.021
Well frequently the remedy has been to allow lower passing scores for Blacks for the same position as for whites. And if in fact, even though the test might not be directly job related, the test does tap certain intellectual abilities, this would possibly put the Blacks at a disadvantage. For example, if a test has some mathematics in it and the job relates to serving something that has some mathematics in it, and by virtue of the court ordered remedy, which is a frequent remedy, to take the highest Blacks regardless of where they are on the list this, might then put the Blacks at a disadvantage in the training program, where in fact it might be assumed that everyone has the same level of mathematics ability. And this is the type of question the psychologists are raising: to what extent, as the court orders remedies to alleviate the inequitable numbers of Blacks in certain occupations, are they in fact providing people who may not be able to provide the service, or are they in fact providing a remedy which might be almost as bad as the originally biased test.

Charles Williams 00:25:39.540
Well, as to the first part in terms of people who would not be able to provide the service, I think the thing to understand with all of these issues and all these questions--if it can be shown, for example, that someone is not capable--the whole argument in these cases where you're dealing with tests is that these people are in fact capable of doing the jobs in question. If it could be shown that people were not, I don't think there'd be any question that this person, for example, I don't think anyone would want a fireman or policeman who couldn't do the job. I don't think there's any question about that. But I think the basic point is that these people do have whatever it is that it takes to do the job in question. And as to the second question on whether the remedy the court is fashioning is worse than the problem, I just can't answer--

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:29.201
That's a tough one.

Charles Williams 00:26:29.520
[laughs] I can't answer obviously. That's as blunt as possible, I just am not in a position to be able to give an answer on that.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:26:36.811
That really is a--

Charles Williams 00:26:37.591
That's a problem, let's face it, that you always face when you're giving remedial relief. And I've had arguments before appellate courts where they've more or less agreed, or I've seen arguments of others that you may be right, the lower court made a mistake. But what we want to ask you is, if we give you the remedy you're asking for, is it worse than the possible--than the problem that you originally had. And I think that's a constant problem you face in any type of litigation.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:03.750
Well as we come toward the close of our show, possibly you could mention a couple of things that the Fund is going to look into in the near future.

Charles Williams 00:27:11.901
Well I guess the first thing to start with is that, as I mentioned I think early in the show about the question of capital punishment, that there have been an increase in the numbers of people--there have been people sentenced to death since the decision of Furman v. Georgia in 1972. We will continue our efforts in the area of capital punishment, also in employment, schools, and administration of justice generally.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:40.670
OK, well I think you've given us a fantastic insight into the efforts of the Legal Defense Fund to fight racism through the courts, and have given us some ideas as to how the Fund actually goes about making these decisions and fighting these cases. And I'd like to thank our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason," Charles Williams, Assistant Counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund for being with us tonight. Thank you, Charles.

Charles Williams 00:28:05.571
Thank you, Dr. Brown.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:07.010
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason," with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-African Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs department, in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

