Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:00:01.690
Since the late 1960s opportunities for Black executives in business have risen tenfold. What is happening to these Black executives in these times of recession and decreased attention to the needs of Blacks? Hear Lee Archer, director of Equal Opportunity for the General Foods Corporation, one of the nation's largest corporations, discuss these issues on tonight's Soul of Reason.

Announcer 00:00:44.231
This is Soul of Reason: a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:01:10.960
Our guest this evening is Lee Archer, director of Equal Opportunity affairs of the General Foods Corporation and chairman of the national... North Street Capital Corporation which is a Black funding organization. Glad to have you with us tonight Lee.

Lee Archer 00:01:26.980
Thank you for inviting me Roscoe.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:01:28.781
Now talking about Blacks in business and equal opportunity in major corporations, let's get right to the case. As we said in the tease, things did boom in the late 60s and early 70s, and now, as we move into 1975, things don't look quite so good. But you're close to it because this is what you do every day. What's your opinion?

Lee Archer 00:01:50.410
Well my opinion on the matter is that things were going along fantastically well for a short period of time. However starting in the early 1970s -- '72 about -- there seems to have been a sort of regression in the forward mobility - upward mobility - of Black executives in major corporations. I can't say... we can't pin down the exact cause for this but it seems to be a number of multiple causes. One: the recession; two: the great movement of women into the organizational structure; and, three: possibly a kind of reaction to the advancements that Blacks had been making in the previous 10 years.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:02:42.370
I think those are things I've heard everywhere and many of the women of course feel it isn't fair to blame them for the depressed progress of Blacks or the retarded progress of Blacks. On the other hand, it is certainly true, that as equal opportunity has been expanded to include not only Blacks and Hispanics but also women and also the aged and also the handicapped, unfortunately many of the corporations see only a certain percentage of their workforce as dealing with these special populations and it ends up to be which one is in vogue in a given year. How, for example, have you observed this working, in relationship to Blacks and women? Do you find this double counting -- a woman counts... a Black woman counts both as a Black and a woman -- or do you find that some corporations, yours for example, are really trying to deal with both issues?

Lee Archer 00:03:37.310
Of course I have to admit that in my corporation things are a lot different than in some of the others that have the endemic problem that they have not been able to overcome. Truthfully, women have a right to be displeased with the idea that they have taken something from the minorities or the Black male movement as it started out to be and this is not my complaint. They are certainly entitled to everything that they've asked for and gotten, but what has happened with the proliferation of ... by the government... of various minority groupings as you mentioned; first Blacks, then Spanish-Americans; and American Indians; Orientals; then the Vietnam era veterans act; then the aged 40 to 65 -- and you can go on and on and on with these numbers -- the concept appears to be that you can kill it by just the very numbers alone because the corporations as they see it are being inundated with various minority groups all of which have to have programs specifically designed for them. Now what they've done is they haven't enlarged the pie at all. They just decided that each gets a smaller slice. And the problem that you mentioned is most important and that is that the corporations tend to move in the areas of the most pressure and that pressure is now toward women.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:05:10.030
And of course that's the way our government works too. But let's take sort of a devil's advocate point of view: the managers of these corporations basically are white males and they say we've been working very, very well before; and many of our people have been in the pipeline, have been working hard trying to work themselves up. Now why, in 1975, should a woman, should a Black, should a Hispanic, should a handicapped person who hasn't had the degree of experience that they've had -- the commitment to the company -- come in and get a top job. I think I understand some of the answers to this but how do you answer this? Because I'm sure this is a type of question that on your job in equal opportunity at General Foods Corporation you have to deal with literally every day.

Lee Archer 00:05:53.001
It comes up frequently and I too understand some of the reasoning on it. A man who's been in the pipeline, white, working forward, who probably had nothing to do with the disadvantages that Blacks and women have suffered as far as he is concerned; but he has benefited from it. And my argument is that he is receiving some of the benefits from it and that now there must be some make up to those who have been disenfranchised for over a long period of time. It's hard to sell a man this...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:06:26.670
Yeah, particularly when he says why me? Why should I have to...

Lee Archer 00:06:29.191
...right...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:06:29.402
...be the one who pays the penalty for what's happened on behalf of white people in the generations ahead.

Lee Archer 00:06:35.730
You frequently hear, "Well my parents didn't come to this country until 1920. You know, we had nothing to do with slavery, we had nothing to do with this. We had nothing to do with the other thing," and that is not really the problem. Whether he came yesterday or forty... fifty... a hundred years ago, indirectly he has received the benefits of the discrimination against women and minorities during that period of time. And now it's not that we are saying that we should reverse the discrimination -- which is their argument at all times now, "Well this is reverse discrimination" -- but what we're trying to do is level it. I think that someone mentioned once and I can't remember who it was, but I thought it was very apropos, that to take the Black or the woman now and put him in the corporation -- say okay now everything's equal, run from here even with everyone else -- is like taking a person and breaking his leg and then putting them in a foot race and saying OK now we're ready to run you in a race. Now run, and we expect you to do as well as everyone else. And that's really not going to happen. So...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:07:39.271
Of course there is another point which I've heard some white executives mention, and that is that when they bring Blacks or when they bring Hispanics... they bring women into their corporation, into the executive suites as it were; they do get some different perspectives on how to do business and how to reach some of the markets they're trying to reach. For example your corporation, General Foods, has several products that are highly visible in the Black community: the Kool-Aid product for example, and Maxwell House coffee product, and two or three others that are very highly visible in the Black community. And by means of some enlightened salesmanship, advertising, promotion, it appears to me that the company both has an obligation to serve the Black community and also, in terms of enlightened self-interest, can probably get a larger share of that market if they are visible with Black executives and Black sales promotion people.

Lee Archer 00:08:38.130
Well that's true and I don't want to appear to be self-serving as regard to my own organization; however, I would like to just say that I know one of the reasons I'm here... one of the reasons why I appear on shows and on panels and all... is because my corporation, General Foods, is well advanced amongst corporations for this so-called enlightened approach. And it really isn't enlightened, it's just a recognition of the fact that there are certain aspects to the community that must be administered in a certain way. And as a result, since we are a consumer product organization, we've taken this direction. We've looked at the minority and female entrance into the business as a business operation. What is it in disadvantages not to do it? What is it in advantages to do it? And anyone that looks at it in that respect has got to come out to the fact that there has to be participation by minorities; has to be participation by women. To not do so would deprive yourself of a lot of talent and a lot of ability.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:09:49.370
But then there is this other point, and that is the morality of it, that we have other industries -- the brokerage industry, the manufacturing industry, the communications media (I mean the media that we are now) -- really has a terrible record in terms of moving minorities into positions of administrative and executive authority even though they have a significant proportion of people in the lower ranks. But there's a morality involved in this that if a society aspires to be an equal society and to give opportunities for people, people should have that opportunity; and since the doors to the executive suites have been closed for so long, many Blacks just don't know how to get in. I was noticing in the most recent issue of BLACK ENTERPRISE magazine that they have now a Black executive search corporation that actually seeks out Blacks for corporations which then would suggest that maybe there are more opportunities than most of us think are available. What's your opinion on that?

Lee Archer 00:10:51.050
Well the number of Blacks in the executive suites at the highest level is similar to the condition of women: very very low. No matter how you look at it the number is nowhere proportionate to our number in society or even our numbers in ability and training. This is something we have to work around. However the opportunities are there and I think they are widening. Except that now the competition is greater for those situations.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:11:21.590
The competition between the Blacks? Or between the Blacks and the whites?

Lee Archer 00:11:24.200
Between the Blacks and the whites, and the Blacks and the women, and the women and the whites.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:11:27.920
As the recession has brought about a shrinkage in some of these positions and some of these companies, the competition becomes fiercer and the so-called favored position that some minorities have in training had in the early 70s is really more or less disappeared.

Lee Archer 00:11:45.560
Right, it is. And a second problem is is that those minorities who are capable and who are able to find these jobs tend to move frequently. It's the kind of pirating from one corporation to another not a deliberate act and all but...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:12:03.680
...it is deliberate....

Lee Archer 00:12:04.960
Well deliberate, I mean, but it is not designed to deprive a company of their best men, but that we need ours and we'll get it...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:12:11.540
... competitive market. It's the same thing we have in the universities with Black professors. Many of the top Black professors have several offers and they just get moved around from one place to the next.

Lee Archer 00:12:20.840
One of my biggest worries is that we'll have young Blacks in our organization that have great potential and ... can we keep them long enough for them to do it? They tend to jump around and they're always the new boy on the block somewhere else. And part of being a corporate executive is not only your ability, but your knowledge of the company and the way the company perceives you ... have... they're comfortable with you or not. In... as you move higher and higher in the hierarchy.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:12:51.230
In other words you're suggesting that this musical chairs ... this pirating... that's going on among some of the younger Black executives, might actually be hurting the potential of the executive because even though they may be getting more money, they may not be getting or gaining the type of expertise, or the residency, that goes along with moving into the highest brackets because basically if we're talking about executives, we're talking about middle managers at best. They're...

Lee Archer 00:13:18.082
...correct..

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:13:18.085
...very, very few top managers who are Black you probably could count them on one hand which is one of the sad things about it now. Some of the white executives will say well look it took us several years, two decades to get here ...

Lee Archer 00:13:34.902
...twenty, thirty years.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:13:35.811
But young people both Black and white are now saying I don't have to wait that long. There are a number of Black corporations that are headed by young Black men: corporations like Motown or Stax Records -- that happens to be a business which Blacks have moved into -- the record industry. Sometimes in the media industry young men like Ed Lewis of Essence magazine: people like that who are saying look I don't have to wait around. But in the big corporations it appears that you still have that waiting period which then raises the question about our pool. Do we have a large enough number of young Blacks, Black men and women, going into business preparing themselves to be executives.

Lee Archer 00:14:21.260
We've discussed this the other day at a... at a meeting just what are the number out there coming in making the base? If you take a look at the white executive that makes it into the very highest ranks of management, the pool he comes from is a thousand times larger than the pool of a Black executive moving up. Now fundamentally they have us there when they say well you don't have that large pool so that when we start from our small base -- when you find the drop outs and the fall outs and those who can't hack the program -- what comes out of the top of that pyramid is a very small number.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:15:00.230
They may be extremely competent but very small in number. Whereas in the white population they are also very competent but because they come from a larger pool that even the same percentage gives them a far larger number of people to deal with.

Lee Archer 00:15:12.610
... a far larger number. And these search firms -- the Black search firms and the white search firms specialize in dealing with Black executives -- have had a very remunerative sort of business in moving these around.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:15:27.830
But they move the same people around...

Lee Archer 00:15:29.111
Apparently they are moving the same people most of the time. Now what's going to happen in the next few years, I hope, is that with the continuing pool, with the new young Blacks coming out of the colleges, who are shying away from some of the social service kind of educational training and moving into what they call the hard businesses -- the mathematics, the MBAs, the Business Administration, the technology fields -- that will take this alibi from the corporations that we don't have that many. Now they're still going to have to work their apprenticeship, but it should not be as long as the apprenticeship of the whites who have been in the corporation for a long time.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:16:17.780
I understand though that even in the MBA programs -- the Masters of Business Administration programs -- they are not that large a number of Blacks. Apparently even though the message is getting out that Blacks should go into business particularly in times of recession, they are tending now to go back to the more traditional occupations. Let's talk about what it takes to be an executive. What kind of education does it take. What type of characteristics does it take. Because possibly some of the younger people in our audience might be interested in, you know, what does it take to be an exec. What kind of education? What type of skills should I have? What do I do?

Lee Archer 00:16:57.710
Well there are two types of executives, is the way I look at it. Number one is the specialized type -- those that come up through the technologies in the service: the engineers, the scientists, the chemists etc.; and, then there's the general business executive. And they're two different types of education that are required for this. So the first thing the young man has to do, or the young woman, is decide what they want to do -- their area of expertise. Now there is some switch over after you get in an organization where the scientists can become a general business executive, but very little of the opposite where the...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:17:33.830
...because of the technical training involved...

Lee Archer 00:17:35.001
...because of the technical training involved. But he can... the general business manager can manage a number of scientists as long as he knows what they're trying to accomplish. So we say pick what you want to do -- find it, and then get yourself a good basic education in that area. The next thing...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:17:53.421
...and that would mean going to a good college or business school or what?

Lee Archer 00:17:59.750
Well a good college... a business school. Truthfully I think that a college degree is necessary now. It's a part of the formula in the corporation. No matter how smart you are, if you don't have some credentials to indicate that, it will take a much longer time for them to find out about it.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:18:18.801
Although a lot of the younger Black executives are people who have started in college, gotten some college, and sort of dropped out. So are you saying that college education, or a degree itself? Or does this vary from corporation to corporation?

Lee Archer 00:18:32.390
I think it varies from corporation of corporation, but I think that fundamentally in the modern period there are very few senior executives who have not been weighted on their educational qualifications -- I would agree of some type. Now one of the arguments I hear frequently is that, "Well a degree doesn't prove anything." It may not prove anything but as an indication of application of effort and the ability to complete a regiment of courses... and it certifies to some ability. There are people who argue that you can come out of college and not know any more than the next man who hasn't completed college. I find a little difficulty with that. The fact that you are there in an institution designed to teach you new things and experience new things is all indicative of a better preparation than any you could get on the street.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:19:27.810
Alright now, after having gotten this education how does a Black get into this business.

Lee Archer 00:19:33.180
Well I think first he has to decide the kind of company he wants to be with. And this is a philosophical sort of thing. Into the company, he should start out -- and again he has to kind of conform to the mold of the company. Now this is not selling his soul to the organization or becoming an organization man. But the successful business executive is selected on how he appears in the company stream. The one who's way out in left field that way out in right field is not going to get the attention that is necessary, or the training necessary, to move around. You need broad based training.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:20:16.590
Does this mean -- to get some clarity -- that a militant Black for example has to give up his militance in order to function successfully in a corporation? Or can he be militant and still function effectively in a corporation?

Lee Archer 00:20:31.350
I think he could still... he can be militant and still function in a corporation, but he's not going to be as effective if his militancy is directed against the organization as if he would... if he if he had his militancy in some other aspect of his life.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:20:46.201
But that's a little hard thing because I talked with one executive -- he's with an insurance company -- and he pointed up that they were doing some advertising that had a particular type of policy that would relate to the Black community. Yet in the advertising they had no one who was Black there. And he took a very strong advocacy position that there should be some Blacks in that ad and apparently he won and he's still with the firm. Now I would consider that a form ...

Lee Archer 00:21:10.191
That is not advocacy.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:21:10.197
OK, let's say that...

Lee Archer 00:21:13.141
That is just plain business knowledge. Now the militancy I'm talking about is that expressed in: "we're going to boycott the president's office," or "we're going to march down the halls of the corporation," or the extremes of dress that... no one says that an individual can't dress any way he wants to... after the corporation... after his day in the corporation is over; however, it's a little difficult to go to a meeting with executives from another corporation and you're the only one there who looks different -- that much different -- than everyone else. Now the argument again is that you're not buying their looks or they're soul or anything, doesn't match up there. Every executive in that corporation gives a little bit for the conformity -- for the comfortableness -- in which the other people deal with them. Now, you mentioned the example of a Black corporate executive seeing something happen that he knows is wrong in an area that he is expert in: being Black. His bringing it to their attention and fighting to the death on that is not militancy; that's just good business knowledge on his part; and that is something that a corporation should expect of them.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:22:37.350
In other words you're reinforcing the point that it's important for corporations to have Black executives particularly where a significant part of activity deals with Blacks. But let's talk about something...

Lee Archer 00:22:47.101
Let me cut you off there. Even if a significant part of their organization does not deal with Blacks...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:22:52.301
...excellent point...

Lee Archer 00:22:52.711
... it's necessary that they have some of this type of expertise in the corporation. And the more the better because just like we don't live here alone in this nation, the white man is not here alone either.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:23:06.450
And of course many of the ideas in advertising... in business have come from the Black community. Many of the slogans that are used, many of the techniques, much of the music, and that certainly is an extremely valid point. But I want to get on to something that General Foods is doing to get young people interested in business. What you call "Operation Opportunity." Could you tell our audience about that.

Lee Archer 00:23:28.920
I was trying to bring that in because -- I think that when you were discussing the point about how to prepare yourself -- this is a classic example of giving preparation to young Blacks. General Foods has a program called "Operation Opportunity" which is designed to start young Blacks or young minorities (now since we broaden the program to include them -- and even whites are in the program now)... but young people who have the education and the inclination to direct their activity toward the business world. Our program has been in effect for about seven years This is the seventh year, this year; and we've had in it every year from an average of fifty to fifty-five young people. They come from the high schools from freshman to the senior year. And what the program does is we give them a job in the corporation in the summer and pay them a salary which they can use as they see fit.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:24:31.560
What kind of job might they get?

Lee Archer 00:24:33.510
Well we try to direct their job toward their interests. For instance if a person is interested in the computer or operational, we'll put in the computer; if a young person is in the marketing aspect of it, we'll put him in the marketing area. We've had him in the scientific end, and in the chemistry department. We've had him in the arts. In fact I don't remember a single section of General Foods in which these young people have not worked. But the key to it is that we also place in escrow a sum of money equal to what they earn and then we hold their feet to the fire as it were. We say that this money you cannot collect unless you continue in education. And we'll pay it to you to go to college for additional outside training, for special training etc.. Now over a period of three four years a young person is in the program he can put twenty, six, eight, ten thousand dollars which he then -- or she then -- collects as they are in the colleges.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:25:37.050
Well I'm sure that is something people are listening, or their parents are listening, they say how do you get into this dynamite program.

Lee Archer 00:25:44.160
That is one of the problems. As big as the program is, we cannot possibly accommodate the number of people who would be interested in it. So for the present time and has been for some time we have tried to maintain it in the Westchester area, which is around our headquarters, and around certain of our larger plants across the country. We work it like this: we ask the schools to make a recommendation to us as to students who have the ability and the inclination to go to higher college... higher work... and need this sort of financial support. Now the school makes the recommendation to us we say that this school will have a quota of five, this school a quota of six... four... three; and from the different schools they give us a number; we bring them in; we try to find out what their interest is; we find a manager in the corporation who is supporting the program; and we bring those people together and see if we can find a meaningful fit and a meaningful job for them.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:26:51.120
That sounds like an excellent program. If anyone in the audience wanted to know more about the program whom would they contact at General Foods?

Lee Archer 00:26:58.111
Well they could contact my office and we'd have either myself or someone from my office that would get back to them...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:27:03.031
... that's Lee Archer the director of Equal Opportunity affairs at General Foods Corporation and you're located in White Plains N.Y.?

Lee Archer 00:27:09.350
Yes, 250 North Street, White Plains. New York. Now one of the reasons that I try to bring this subject up is that we think it's very interesting... it should be very interesting... to other corporations to initiate programs of a similar type. The fact that there are companies that are interested in it is indicative by the number of companies that have contacted us in the past three or four years and ask us about our program.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:27:33.580
Well I think that what you've just said does point up a way in which young Blacks and other minorities can move into the business world. And it highlights the need for training. It highlights the need for awareness. And again I think that General Foods... and under your direction... are doing an excellent job of reaching into this. But even in GF I'm sure that there's a lot more to be done.

Lee Archer 00:27:56.681
We recognize that.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:27:56.842
And that's what the task is in the future. I'd like to thank our guest on tonight's Soul of Reason, Lee Archer director of Equal Opportunity affairs of General Foods Corporation, for talking with us about opportunities for Black executives in the major corporations.

Announcer 00:28:11.650
You've been listening to Soul of Reason...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr, 00:28:13.860
Sorry, we didn't get to...

Announcer 00:28:14.472
...with your host, the director of the Institute for Afro-American affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. And featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. Soul of Reason is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again. Next week.

