Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:02.9.999999999999773
Are Black Studies dying out? What is the relevance of Black Studies to today's black students? Which courses are the most successful in Black Studies programs? Hear Dr. Leonard Jeffries, director of Black Studies at City College of the City University of New York discuss these questions on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:41.781
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that will examine the roots of the black thoughts. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:08.901
With us on "Soul of Reason" tonight is Dr. Leonard Jeffries who is director of Black Studies at City College and we will be discussing the allegation that Black Studies are falling off that black students and white students are no longer as interested in Black Studies as before when they first came into great popularity in the late 60s and early 70s. Leonard, what is your reaction to this? Is this a self-fulfilling prophecy or is it a reflection of present trends?

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:01:41.600
Well I personally feel it's the whole present status of Black Studies has to do with certain trends taking place in not only the academic arena but also in the national arena. One of the things that we should remember is that Black Studies as we know it on college campuses is a phenomenon that grew out of the black revolution of the 60s, the student movement being one of the most important aspects of it, and with the demand for meaningful participation, more admittance of black students more black faculty more courses that were meaningful in terms of their experience the phenomenon of Black Studies grew and spread across the country.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:02:38.010
Now one of the things that I've frequently said is that in some ways the demand on the part of black students for Black Studies was a demand for recognition of their existence as individuals, meaningful individuals, rather than completely a reflection of their need to know about the black experience because one of the things that as professors in Black Studies we were aware of is that Black Studies are just like any other area of academic inquiry, it's hard work.

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:03:09.022
Right.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:09.026
.Involves a lot of reading a lot of study a lot of thought and the simplistic view that Black Studies involves a little bit about Nat Turner and a little bit about Frederick Douglass and a little bit about Malcolm represents Black Studies is really a stereotype and it's just so completely untrue, that when students do come to a confrontation with Black Studies as an area, they realize it's good solid hard work. So that since part of the demand for Black Studies was a kind of a psychological point they wanted to get across with the administration that yes, we are important, we're here, recognize us by giving us some courses in our names, has tended to confuse the public. My view is that in many ways the enrollment in Black Studies has stabilized. And what you find is a reaction to some stereotypes that some people had that thought that literally every black student and a lot of white students in every institution would want to take every Black Studies course. And that of course is certainly not true. I think the solid courses, the history courses, the literature courses, some of the sociology courses, politics courses, have continued to sustain their enrollment I know that's been the case at New York University what has been the experience at City College?

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:04:34.930
Well this has been my experience also at the City College and I can say this as a general reference to the whole City University which has a dozen programs. And I would be in general agreement with what you said and I think this applies also to the state university system a state college system in California where I was for three years and I'm familiar with the programs there. And as you mentioned I think there's several levels there is that there was the psychological aspect of the black students needing that individual and group recognition coming into a what could be considered alien white environment. And there was the need for political leverage and the political leverage was the demand for professors, for courses, for programs, for centers. But now we've moved into the period where serious academic work in relationship to this discipline, which is so meaningful to black folks, has to be the focus, and in this area this is where some of the programs will stand because they have the resources and others that were put together without resources, without the type of staff, without the situations that could allow them to survive, will have to fade away.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:40.872
Now in February, February 6 and 7, the New York State Department of Higher Education is sponsoring a statewide probably be a region-wide conference to evaluate where Black Studies are in New York State and representatives of private colleges and state colleges and city colleges will be sitting down to discuss this particular issue and one of the things that will be discussed is the whole question of staffing. Because two things have occurred: one is that Black Studies being a relatively newly defined, although not new area of knowledge, a newly defined area, many professors from the established disciplines have either had to change their particular focus, or else were unwilling to do so. As a result you have a goodly number of new people coming into the academic community. As enrollment in some institutions has turned down, the total enrollment, not the enrollment in Black Studies courses per se, there's some move to cut staff to cut line and frequently, like in everything, it's last to be hired first to be hired for both young academicians, and black academicians, and Hispanic academicians. To what extent do you see the whole question of the availability of an adequate number of competent faculty for Black Studies as a problem?

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:07:06.530
Well it is a problem it has many aspects and we hope to really have an analysis of it and have it ready for your conference in February. We met as directors of Black Studies last Monday and they were getting this documentation together on our various programs in the City University and staffing is a crucial problem. As you pointed out, many people come from other disciplines, have to make adjustment to the, this new, newly defined Black Studies body of knowledge and it is a major problem simply because the responsibility is enormous for the professor. He not only has to do a great deal of re evaluation, reading the materials, applying it and analyzing it in different ways. And many people are not prepared for this. So that, that restricts the number of those people that are really dedicated to the discipline and as a result the search for staff becomes a major question. And then the resources that are available in this time of shortages and budget deficits also prevents us from attracting those people who we feel could make a contribution.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:17.030
Now as you begin to think about those areas of knowledge, those disciplines as it were, that tend to be the primary focal points of Black Studies, immediately the mind turns to history. Black history as reflected in African history and also Afro-American history and history of the Caribbean, tends to be a staple of Black Studies programs. Certainly black literature some of which reflects the history and heritage of all of it but does some of which is just beautiful literature in of itself, is another staple. The whole question of black political development, the sociology of blacks, those areas become important staples or bases of your Black Studies programs. Which of these tend to attract the greatest student interest? Which of these also tend to attract the greatest number of qualified professors at this point?

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:09:18.520
Right well it seems clear if I use the California experience and City College experience that we would have to say that our curriculum for example at Cit College is broken down to six main areas of concentration. And the first one is history and political development, and our major effort is in the area of reconstruction of black history and a political analysis of the experience of black folks worldwide, whether in the Americas, the Caribbean, and Africa and then the next area would be sociology and psychology. We're looking at the black family the relationship of social structures and institutions. And after that would come economics and community development, and because of the need for certain expertise and background, this area is not as attractive as the first two.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:13.070
I found that this is one of the weakest areas because economics as you know is frequently called the queen of the social sciences because it does have a merging of mathematical theory and social theory, and requires not only a lot of formal study but a lot of experience. And unfortunately there are not many black economists-

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:10:31.701
Well that's true...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:32.193
in general. And then even fewer who specialize particularly on the problems of the black community, so that does become an area of concern. I imagine you must have an [... ] in the creative arts and literature.

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:10:44.230
Right, and next was the area of creative arts and language which we would include literature and also the foreign languages: the Creole of the Caribbean or African languages such as Yoruba or Swahili. And then we have an area of science and technological development in relationship to the community which services students in the biomedical program, students in architecture, students in engineering, and...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:11:10.421
That's more of an interpretive rather than a scientific course per se.

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:11:14.860
Right then we were developing a series courses that relate the interpretive experience of this discipline to the black experience itself, and then the last area is the area of teaching and development of curriculum materials, so. And this again is a limited area although we hope to expand it.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:11:33.680
It's more what you call a service area

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:11:35.881
Right.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:11:36.201
Frankly every teacher who teaches in any inner city or any city all over the country needs to know something about Black Studies because so many of the students are going to be black, and in the case of New York, and Los Angeles, San Antonio Texas, they need to say,know something about the history of Hispanic Americans who can be Puerto Ricans or Chicanos as well. So that's just a sine qua non for inner city teachers today, for big city teachers. As a matter of fact I think you'd have to say that some knowledge of black history is sine qua non for any intelligent person today.

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:12:14.411
That's true.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:12:14.414
And of course that's really is one of our problems. One interesting thing that you said which triggers another set of questions and that has to do with one of the major criticism of Black Studies from some people who are really not sympathetic to it namely that Black Studies have become a form of political indoctrination. And you said that one of your areas is analysis of history and political development of blacks. How do you as a academician differentiate between political indoctrination and development of a analysis of the political situation that blacks have faced.

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:12:54.730
Well I think these distinctions are important and it's important however to understand the significance of both areas. Political development in terms of a person's consciousness about himself or his group or his community or his nation is very important. And it's important for black folks to understand the need for political consciousness so we can say political indoctrination...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:13:17.981
Political consciousness could you could you build on that.

Dr. Leonard Jeffries 00:13:20.711
Right. Where then the need to be aware that in a society in which you're in a political arena and political clout decides what share of the pie you will get, how your interests are going to be protected, how you're gonna get those resources to build those survival institutions and developmental aspects of your community. You have to have a political consciousness and a, an understanding of how to move in what direction and what forms and Black Studies has to provide this. And that should be a legitimate part of any Black Studies program.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:13:53.681
Let's hope- You would also need the skills to analyze in a very meaningful way what this experience means not only contemporarily in terms of your political action, but historically what has been the ramifications of political relationships vis-a-vis your people and their development. One question I was going to ask is: is a logical consequence of this analysis some type of movement or exhortation of students to register to vote and to participate actively in a political process? Now this course raises some even deeper philosophical questions because some of the political activists related to black community have said the political system is so bereft of conscience and able to function for black people that black people should opt out of it. On the other hand I think the analysis of history suggests that you really can't opt out of it because decisions are going to be made for you regardless of whether you're there or not as better for you to be there. Then to what extent does urging students to register to vote become a matter of analysis or a matter of a form of political action dash indoctrination? I know of some classes where in giving grades for the final of the term I know some professors have added ten points where students have registered to vote and some of the more traditional academic people have said this shows how un-academic Black Studies are because you give people credit for something that's not academic. What's your reaction to something like that? Well I wouldn't... In other words I wouldn't write. I would raise the question of political participation even though I, in parties, even though I think it's necessary because you have to understand your environment even though it may be a negative one, you've got to interact with it. Now the question of credit for registering, I think it's we should encourage people to register and understand the political process even though it may be in many cases a negative one. And it would appear to me because we have practicum courses where you're out in the community, where you're doing work, and you're getting course credit that if a person not only registered to vote but actually participated with a political group, a political club, political activities, that he could be given extra credit for that activity. So I just wouldn't even pooh-pooh the idea that just giving someone extra credit, it could be a meaningful understanding of the political process involved there. And of course we know that in politics courses in urban studies courses and programs in public administration universities and colleges have for a long period of time given credit for participation in community and urban life. Right. So the part of the criticism that this represents is an example of the fact that Black Studies are not truly academic is really not a valid criticism. And I think that's something that people who evaluate Black Studies have to be aware of. I think there is some sensitivity on the part of many people to, really looking at the hard truth of the black experience, the hard truth the black experience on one hand is beautiful, on the other hand it's agonizing, on one hand it's uplifting, other hand's depressing. And black people haven't always been heroes and they haven't always been villains. Right. And that really is the crux of looking into this, which then leads to the question a lot of people ask: how serious are black students and those white students become involved, in really analyzing and studying the black experience and knowing the truth and analyzing the truth? How serious are they? Well this is a key and crucial question which we're deciding at, we're working on at City College right now. We suspend classes for three days today, tomorrow, and... Friday. We suspend classes for three days Just before the Christmas holidays. Right. And just evaluate the program and encourage the students to take a hard look at what Black Studies is all about, how we can improve it, etc... But what we are dealing with is a whole process of miseducation by an educational system nationwide, a whole relationship of the black experience to the general experience of America which is a negative one, and it is up to the instructors with the students to create a whole new positive dynamic approach to this body of knowledge and in many instances you succeed and in some instances you just do not have the time or the circumstances to reverse that process of negation and miseducation which is actually taking place. I'm constantly encouraged. At City College last year, last spring, I had one of the most outstanding classes that I've ever had in eight years of teaching and most of that class was stimulated to such an extent, that when we had the final exam, of the 38 people enrolled in the class 36 were there to take the final. Some of them didn't have to take it but they took it just because of their interest in the, in the area. Now I think that that what you say is very true and it probably relates to other areas of study. For example you say how serious are students who study Shakespeare, or how serious are students who study Faulkner, or how serious are students who study the Irish revolution in their various courses? Are they about these particular courses? You'd have to ask the same question because in some ways education is viewed in our society as a commodity. You go in and you spend the time, you pay your money, you get x number of credits, and somebody puts a stamp on you: bachelor's degree, master's degree, doctor's degree, and you're educated! Whereas the real process of education is a process of experiencing, [a] process of interacting, the process of developing a commitment and understanding, a process of being able to analyze. And I think, first of all, I think the process of having students look at this is a positive one, and I would be inclined to concur that if you apply the normal credible probability to the quality of Black Studies courses vis-a-vis the quality of courses in the general university, you'd have the same curve: a goodly number of them will be very good, a few of them will not be very good, and the majority of them will have a range of response going from average to somewhat above average. And I think that is is part of it, part of the reaction of students to Black Studies. I think the negative, let's look at this, what do you think the major source of negative criticism of Black Studies are other than the initial political activity attached to them. I think that so many people see that, remember that picture of the Black students marching out of the Black center at Cornell with guns over their shoulder and say that's what Black Studies are about! Now, first of all the issue really wasn't about Black Studies, and secondly that really was a tremendous stereotype of what Black Studies were about. On the other hand, many schools did start Black Studies because students sat in, and said if you don't give us Black Studies we're gonna burn down your administration building, and that kind of thing, so. But once that passed, there were other kinds of criticisms that were directed at Black Studies. What were some of those criticisms, and what is your reaction to the validity of them? Well many of the criticisms... their criticisms are many as there would be in any new endeavor, and some of them are valid and we've got to make some adjustments and improve the situation, some of them need to be explained away. I think even if we take Cornell, for example, you're right, this, the famous picture of the gun-carrying students with the belts around them remains in everybody's mind. But Cornell has produced, through the Africana Research Center, one of the strongest and most outstanding programs in the country. And even that program, and we're having Jim Turner come to speak to our students, the director come to speak to our students in the next few days, even that program will have its criticisms. And one of the things is that the programs have become institutionalized and traditional, and they are not innovative as they were designed to be: that they should be related to the community and not only the community locally, meaning the Black community, but the community nationally and internationally, the reach into the Caribbean, the reach into Africa. And then again many times the students will say that the Black Studies courses are too difficult. I found for example that many of our professors are teaching undergraduate students on a graduate- Graduate- Frame of reference academically. Particularly of the men younger and just out of graduate school himself- right- their most recent experiences of that level and tend to project it to the undergraduate students. So that some of these criticisms would be, would be accurate. I find myself a tendency to push the students like I would push graduate students and master's programs or PhD programs and the students are just out of high school, and I've got to sit back and make an adjustment to those situations. And I think there is a tendency also for Blacks to feel that a Black Studies degree has to have a job at the end of it. And as you mentioned before, the development of one's mind, the pushing one to reach inside to develop his resources what- look for that which can help him is one to move in this world of enormous competition is one of the things that we have to develop. I don't think a Black Studies degree or if you have a Black Studies certificate means a job. The job will depend upon the individual's ambition, his desire to push ahead just as a B.A. in Sociology does not mean a job, or a B.A. in Political Science does not mean a job at the end of it. And I think one of the criticisms has been that "what will this Black Studies degree mean to me?" Of course one thing I think is certainly true and if people look at other forms of education, other programs in colleges still is true and that is that most people that amassed a bachelor's degree in English or bachelor's degree in Sociology don't become sociologists, they become or do a variety of things: they work in business, they work in government, they work in other agencies, they work in creative arts... and this background helps to prepare them in some way to cope with the realities of their professional life later on. In addition it's been our experience in New York University is that most black students and the white students who are interested do not necessarily become majors in Black Studies they take a considerable number of courses, they become very much more aware of the intricacies of the black experience they become knowledgeable in a particular area, but not necessarily all the way through the 32 points and the paper that they have to write in order to achieve the concentration as we call it in Afro-American programs. So again the public tends to get a erroneous impression of what Black Studies are that everyone is a major, and everyone is going to go out and teach Black Studies, and as you point up that just really isn't true. But let's talk now about some of your own scholarly work which is probably a good example of the type of scholarship that can be done in an area related to Black Studies. Let's talk about what's known as the Kente Project. It comes from some of the work of Alex Haley and tracing his background back to Gambia. But why don't you tell us about the project? Well the Kente Project is a very exciting area of Black Studies and it's a very important one, and I think it is representative of the new discipline: those areas that we can move into and readily develop, focus our energies on. One of the tragedies though, in terms of our efforts in this area, is that we have to devote so much time to the administration of programs, to handling the bureaucratic mess that we're faced with, and we don't have a chance to use our creativity and focus our efforts on these areas. But fortunately I've been trying to divide my time to work on the Kente project. Kente is the clan name of the family in Africa that Alex Haley found his roots in, and the family located in The Gambia. And what we decided to do was to use the Alex Haley model to demonstrate the continuity of black family development, some of the survival techniques. The continuities through institutional development and various other forms and this has turned out to be an enormous project with 40 people throughout the world, some in Africa, some in the Caribbean, and some in America. I'm doing this research on family history to record the history of the black family. And it's been producing some very surprising materials which we'll have published, which we are trying to get other Black Studies programs to work with. For example at City College six or seven of our staff members are involved in this project. And use of techniques such as oral history which is actually an oral tradition which is the process of transmitting knowledge in Africa that we've inherited.The use of these techniques have helped us to tap new sources for looking at, and analyzing our experience. Well if anyone in the New York metropolitan area is interested in becoming affiliated with that project how would they get affiliated? Well the first step would be to contact myself at the City College, the Black Studies department, and we're hoping that in February and March there'll be a series of conferences on the West Coast-- East Coast and West coasts that people will be invited to and they can participate. And hopefully it will be announced in the public press so that the laymen and scholars who are interested in this area could become involved. I think that's an excellent way of summarizing our program because it puts right on the line a type of scholarship that does occur in Black Studies. I'd like to thank our guest Dr. Leonard Jeffries, director of Black Studies at City College of the City University of New York for being with us on tonight's "Soul of Reason." You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host the director of the Institute of Afro American affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

