Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:21.860
[intro music begins] This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought.

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:27.860
"Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:00:49.220
At 12:00 noon on June 8, a groundbreaking ceremony was held for the new Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture of the New York Public Library. The Center at 135th Street and Lenox Avenue will represent a major development in research in the Black community. On tonight's "Soul of Reason," Ms. Ruth Ann Stewart, Assistant Curator of the Schomburg Center, will be discussing the plans for the new Center.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:01:16.490
And we're glad to have you with us tonight, Ruth Ann.

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:01:18.381
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:01:19.521
Now when we talk about the Schomburg Center—just to put it in perspective—this really is the new facility for what everybody in the Black community calls the Schomburg, which is where you go to look up anything about Black culture and about Black people?

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:01:33.140
That's right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:01:34.101
And the Schomburg was founded many, many years ago—in what way? Could you bring the audience up to date and here's how the Schomburg got started and then talk about the need for the new building?

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:01:45.920
Certainly. By 1925, the Harlem community was the Black community that we know today, and a very sensitive librarian, working at the 135th Street branch at the time, prevailed upon her superiors to establish the Negro Division of the New York Public Library, which was a research division of materials devoted to Black history and literature. This of course, as you know, was in the heart of what was called the Harlem Renaissance and there was tremendous interest in Black materials. In 1926, the private collection of Arthur A. Schomburg—who was a Puerto Rican of African descent who lived in the community and was a private collector of books by and about Blacks—a group of citizens came together and prevailed upon the Carnegie Foundation to donate money to the New York Public Library to purchase Mr. Schomberg's collection, and that became the nucleus of what today is the largest collection of such materials in the world. Mr. Schomburg himself served as Curator from 1933 until his death in 1938, at which time it was named the "Schomburg Collection." And from that nucleus—probably some of the most rare materials we have in the collection, having been in Mr. Schomburg's original collection—the collection has grown to be a tremendously rich and vital resource in Black culture.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:03:11.460
Now when you talk about research collection,—you're just not talking about books, you're talking memorabilia, artifacts, art, records [crosstalk], tapes, et cetera—and in that sense it represents an outstanding research collection. In terms of actual numbers of volumes about Blacks, is the Schomburg the number one in the world, in terms of—let's say Blacks, Afro-American Blacks—is it the largest collection? Or is it mainly the largest in terms of its research?

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:03:39.830
We would say that it is the largest in terms of total volume because it's not just Afro-American but Afro-Caribbean and a good forty percent of the collection is Africana. So, when we talk about our collecting policy, it's very broad in terms of what we collect: we collect material by and about Blacks, regardless of chronology or place. So, we have materials in many foreign languages about Blacks or Black writers that have been translated into Serbo-Croatian or Japanese or Chinese. So we would say it would be, I think, in terms of pure volume of material, variety of material, and volume of users, that we are the largest center of its kind in the world.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:04:21.740
And, in fact, the Schomburg has outgrown its facilities on 135th Street, which—a long time ago, as a matter of fact—

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:04:28.407
—a long time ago—

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:04:28.410
—which led to the need for a new building, a new structure.

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:04:33.951
Absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:04:34.551
And through the efforts of Councilman Fritz Samuels and—

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:04:39.985
—especially—

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:04:40.641
—Borough President Percy Sutton, the mayor, Mayor Beame, and many others—Paul O'Dwyer—the Board of Estimate approved—I believe, was it—a three million dollar grant, which they are receiving from the federal government, in terms of public service building.

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:05:00.052
Right.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:05:01.281
And, as I understand it, the groundbreaking, it required about 90 days of hard work [laughter] to meet a deadline that had been imposed by the federal government—as federal money is coming from which branch of the federal government—

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:05:14.972
—it's coming through the Department of Commerce, under their Public Works Employment Act Title 1. And you're right, the requirement—so as to put the money into the public sector as swiftly as possible—the requirement was that you had to go to construction within 90 days of the receipt of the grant. So in 90 days, we—and that means a lot of different people—did what you usually have years to do in terms of planning. But we had marvelous cooperation with our architects, Bond Ryder Associates, and many people in the public library and people in the public sector. And so we are at construction point at this time.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:05:54.470
One of the things I think might be mentioned is that this didn't happen just in 90 days. At least as long as I've been involved with Black research—and that's many many years—we've been talking about building a new Schomburg. And at one time, there was a plan, an architectural plan, that had been developed—the site had begun to be cleared of some of the residents. And what occurred in the past 90 days was actually demolishing the structures that remained on the site and firming up the architectural plans. And the architects are a Black firm—Yvonne Ryder—and they have themselves contributed a great deal. Because of the various financial situations, they agreed to go ahead and work with the delayed payment on their fee so they could get the material to the government in time to get this started. So this does really represent a triumph of cooperation in the Black community. Now in the building itself—I understand it is to be a ten-story structure. Is that correct?

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:06:52.100
Well, we'd be in violation of the local building codes if we were ten stories, but it would be nice. No, actually it's going to be five stories. It will actually be larger than five stories because two of the floors are double height so as to accommodate expanded shelving in the future. But the actual count is five stories.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:07:14.270
Will you be going into the basement as well?

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:07:17.090
Well, apparently they don't build buildings at basements anymore. They put all that mechanical equipment on the roof so that what would perhaps be considered the basement will actually be the ground floor, the main reading room facilities, of the building itself. You enter it—you actual enter it—on what is the first floor and where the administrative offices are, and then you descend to the lower level for the main reading room—in which the main reading room is an octogonal kind of, well, I guess sort of like an atrium. But anyway, you will be able to stand on the first floor and look down through a glass enclosure into the main reading room where you will observe the activity going on there—

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:07:58.066
—which means in order to get to the first floor you climb up a set of stairs and then look down? Because if you don't have a basement, then you—

Ruth Ann Stewart 00:08:04.251
—well, the basement actually is this ground floor. And I think they've called it, at various times, cellar, basement, ground floor—but you actually, when you enter at street level, you will have to go down into the ground floor or the basement where the main reading room will be. But it's not like you're in the basement because the land is planed so that the back of the reading room opens onto a garden level where there will be a patio, as well as an amphitheater, which we hope to expand into a full programming aspect of the library at some later date.

Dr. Roscoe C Brown, Jr. 00:08:43.640
I noticed that the dedication, or the groundbreaking ceremony, someone made mention—I think it was Fred O'Neill—of the American Negro Theater that started in the then-basement of the current Schomburg building, and immediately someone said, "Well, what we ought to do is to keep the old Schomburg building [laughter] and that can become, in fact, another place for developing black theater." Are there any plans to keep the Schomburg, the present building, in operation——yes, absolutely. Although absolutely obsolete for a twenty-first century library, it is a sound building, and the plans at this point are to renovate that building and turn it into the museum aspect of the library. As you said earlier, we're much more than books, but we do have a significant collection of artifacts and artwork by Afro-Americans, as well as Africans, and using that as the nucleus, we hope to have a full-scale museum in the present building once renovated. [crosstalk] In terms of the theater that—yes, the stage is still there, and it's always interesting when people like Ossie Davis and Fred O'Neill come to the library, they inevitably want to go down and look at that stage with obviously fun remembrances in their eyes. But in terms of what would happen in the development of that as possibly a theater, that's still to be thought through. I know in past programs about the Schomburg we've talked with Jean Blackwell Hudson, who is the present Curator, and Jean told us about many of the things that went on at the Schomburg back in the so-called heyday, which really spans a period of maybe thirty or forty years if we go back to the Harlem Renaissance in the early 30s and then through the 40s—for example, the American Negro Theater wasn't start until about 1940 or '41, and people like Belafonte and Portier didn't come into it until the late 40s, in fact. That's true. And, I think to put this in perspective of the way the world was at that time, there were very few places and things that the Blacks could do south of 125th Street in theater, the arts, or anything of that type. So that basically this new movement of Blacks in the arts and dance and theater is something that really is after the Civil Rights Revolution, which means it's something that came about in the 60s. And, at the same time, it's that activity in the 60s, particularly the beginning of Black Studies, that accelerated the move to more involvement in research about Black people. [crosstalk] For example, in the Schomburg, I imagine you must have doubled the number of people who came to use your resources from the 60s until the present? Well, looking back in the reports, it was approximately 1965 that the explosion at the library occurred—[coughs] excuse me—accelerated by an massive infusion of federal funds into libraries, under something called the Library Service and Construction Act, which brought money into so-called disadvantaged areas. And Schomburg was a recipient of this bountifulness from the federal government which allowed it—[coughs] excuse me—to expand its staff significantly and increase the flow of materials into the library, so that when the explosion came we were ready. Now, when you say "increase the materials"—I have an impression much of what you have are original materials—but now you're saying this federal grant enabled you to increase materials, which meant to increase your acquisition of the various things that were being written about Blacks at that time— —right. Right. Because remember there was—suddenly anything Black could and was being published and so the budgets for acquisition had to soar to keep up with that outpouring. A lot of which was not necessarily the best representation of Black history or literature, but we feel that we should preserve a copy of everything and we make no— —qualitative— —qualitative judgments. Exactly. So we will have the works of Gobineau, the father of racism, right next to the works of Du Bois. All right. Now, as you look to what's happening today in terms of research in Black culture, et cetera, do you find that more people who are from the community, indigenous people, are coming to the Schomburg? Because I know, at one time, most of the people who used the Schomburg were writers and scholars and the like. But with the increased popularity of Black history—and particularly black genealogy, coming out of "Roots"—I would imagine that there are many more indigenous people, people who don't have any particular scholarly qualifications, who want to dig into the Schomburg to find out what's going on. Is that something that you've observed? Yes, but it's always been the great strength of the Schomburg, as a public library, as a division of the New York Public Library, our doors have been open to everyone—unlike at similar collections that are located in academic institutions. So that the community—the man off the street or the woman off the street—was always welcome. And because we stock hometown newspapers, we attract a lot of people, especially from the West Indies, who come in to read their local paper, as well as the paper from Atlanta or Richmond or someplace like that. So that, yes, there's been an awful lot of interest amongst people with no particular relationship to the collection than just their own personal interest. Well, what about genealogy? Do you have much in the Schomburg that helps people to trace their relatives? Well, we certainly do in the sense that we have the U.S. Census on microfilm from 1790 to 1880. There's some six thousand reels [laughs], which we finally found room for—was made possible through a special grant. And while many of the people who come to use the collection, the census collection, are not interested in Black genealogy, we do have a great many, especially with the advent of "Roots." Although, actually, we were feeling the effect of "Roots" many years before it was actually televised because Alex Haley, of course, talked about "Roots" in his search all over the country for almost the twelve years in which he was writing it. And inevitably after every one of his talks we'd get at least one letter from someone saying, "How do I go about doing the same thing as Mr. Haley?" Alright, I'll ask you the question: how does one go about doing the same thing as Mr. Haley? [laughter] Other than having a lot of persistence. [laughs] Well, I don't want to be discouraging, but I can't be encouraging. Alex was able to do what he was able to do because of the fact that he had a strong oral tradition in his family. And I think, as a rule, beyond one or two generations back, we don't have a strong oral tradition. I think this is borne out of many reasons much of which is related to wanting to suppress our whole slave history, the painful facts of it. And so, the average Black family will find it difficult, and so should not be—but should not be discouraged because there are ways, beginning with sitting down and talking with the older members of your family—finding dates, places. In terms of the Census, to get into the Census, all you need to know is a date, a state, and a county. And given that, you can go in to the Census and begin to trace family names. And you need a name, too. Of course, that's why I suggest that you start with just sitting down and talking to some of the older members of your family without a tape. Tapes tend to intimidate. Do you have many documents such as slave records and that type of thing? We do. But your search is really going to take you to county records and courthouse records, which we would not keep. Just general records, not specifically Black records. Now there are things, such as the records of the Freedmen Bureau, which would be a source to search, which we have on microfilm—or rather are obtaining on microfilm. Records of Blacks who served in the Civil War are obtainable in microfilm form. But most of your search is going to be through general legal documents in local courthouses and the National Archives. We're talking on tonight 's "Soul of Reason" with Ruth Ann Stewart, who's Assistant Curator of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture of the New York Public Library and we're talking very particularly about the new building. But since the new building is going to involve people and artifacts and books, we're really talking about how are we going to use this new building. So to go back to the new building, what's going to happen on all of these many, many floors? [laughter] Are they just going to be catalogued alphabetically or geographically? Or are you going to have a tape collection or video collection or film collection? [crosstalk] You know, I've seen people raising money for the Schomburg since the year one—and I know you need it all—but what are you going to do now that you have this beautiful building and, hopefully, it will be open sometime in, what, 1978, '79? Hopefully, the fall of '79. One last point, though, before leaving the question of genealogy: there is a publication coming out this year called "Black Genesis" by a young Black man named Jim Rose, in which he tells you specifically how to undertake genealogical research, specifically Black. We will have the book, of course, at the Schomburg. But, does he have any secrets other than what you talked about? Sounds like an awful lot of hard work and an awful lot of luck. It's an awful lot of hard work and a lot of luck, but people shouldn't be discouraged because we're discovering that our past is not really as hidden or disappeared as people had led us to believe. But, in terms of the new building, the main service floor will be on the ground floor, as I said, and it will be divided between a general reading area and then another section that will be devoted to audiovisual materials. We have a vast quantity of microfilm—some fifteen thousand reels, at this point—that are growing every day. Both generated by ourselves, as well as purchased collections. In the same room, there will be carrels that will be equipped with earphones, which will connect up to our audio setup on another floor—which will include access to our phonograph record collection, our spoken word collection, our oral history collection on tape—so that will be the main activity on the first floor, on the ground floor. The first floor itself where you enter will be given over to administrative functions. And a gallery—I'm happy to say—that on the first floor, there will be a gallery that will run close to three quarters the length of the building. And remembering the building is on Lenox Avenue facing out between— —which means it's a long, narrow type building— —it's a long, narrow—that will be glassed so that it will be open to the public. And it was the architectural device to make this collection reach out into the community to the potential user and not be just a formidable sealed box for the protection of the collection. So we hope that that gallery will be the focus for possible community activities. It will, of course, primarily be a showcase for our own resident collections, but it's conceivable that that can be developed as a focal point for activity. Then, you would rise in elevators—I say that because the present building is three stories high with no elevator—to the archival floor. And the archives are one of the great strengths of the Schomburg. These are unique materials. One of a kind objects, either the unpublished, private papers of an individual or an organization or institution. And we have rich, rich, rich collections, some of which we're still exploring and finding out about because it had not been processed previously. So on that second floor will be a complete floor with very secure arrangements for the materials for archives. Now, remembering this whole building will be humidity-controlled, temperature-controlled, air-conditioned—one of the key needs that we need and that we don't have at the present time. And then the upper floors will be devoted to a stacking area. So that's the building. Now, if anyone who's in the audience has something that they think is valuable that they would like to donate to the Schomburg,—in the form of archives, papers, pictures, artifacts, and so on—do you receive them? Are you glad to receive them? Absolutely. I mean, no library can function on purchased acquisitions alone. I mean, some of our richest collections have come to us strictly as gifts and we are—I would rush to assure you, some people think, "Well, I'll wait until the new building is open." But let me assure you that, at the present time, we have a very active archival preservation program going on, now with a professional staff, and that no time is too soon to begin to add to those materials. And that you need not wait for the assurance of the new building, but we are very much in the archival business now and have been for some years in collecting and preserving. Well, if anyone wants to contact the Schomburg, in regard to donating some archives, to whom would they address the inquiries? What number would they call? Who would they talk with? Well, I'll give then umber of the Center. And once they call, they can make their interest known, and they should probably ask for either the Curator or the Assistant Curator, myself, I'd be delighted. And the number is 862-4000. That's 862——862-4000— —4000. Call the Schomburg and indicate that they have some archives that they would like to donate to the Schomburg. And then some discussion will transpire. Absolutely. And, hopefully, they'll be able to donate them. Absolutely. I think it's very important because there are many, many things about organizations—and this is not only individuals, but it's organizations, church groups, governments— —fraternities, sororities— —fraternities, et cetera—where their records are sometimes lost. And one of the best ways to preserve them is to put them into a good library where they can be cataloged. Absolutely, and things that you may not consider important—for scholars and researchers at a later date developing, writing about the social history of a particular period or a particular area. You'd be surprised the things that they will use to to fill out their research. So don't discount anything—Bibles, family Bibles are important. Letters. We all have a history. Do you take love letters, too? Oh, absolutely. [laughter] [crosstalk] We'll even restrict them if the donor so desires— [jokingly] after I've read them, of course. [laughter]Many Blacks are now going into public office, and one of the things we would hope to do is to be able to retrieve some of the papers and experiences of those Blacks in public office. Do you have a particular focus on getting some of the papers of some of the Blacks who are now in public office? Well, so far we have the papers—a very rich collection—of Dr. Robert Weaver, is the first major elected, excuse me, appointed official that we have——well, to be precise, he's the first Black cabinet officer— —and the first Black cabinet officer— —in the history of the cabinet. And so we consider that a particularly rich collection. And one, hopefully, that will attract others and will be seen as a precedent. In terms of the Black elected officials at this point, they're so busy making history, they don't stop to pause to think of what's going to happen to that history, but we're on the case. [laughs] Ok. But you ought to be. Now, some people have been talking about intensifying activities at places like Howard University and Hampton Institute, where they have two very fine libraries about Black culture. Do you find yourselves in competition with these organizations? Do you cooperate? These institutions, do you cooperate? How does that work out? Well, not Hampton so much, but certainly Howard, which I would say, next to Schomburg, is the richest resource. That's the—they call it—the Morgan Library? The Moorland-Spingarn Research Center at Howard. I would suspect there's a certain amount of competition, but there's so much material out there and also there's a geography thing, too. I mean, we are very steeped in New York history, as Howard is very steeped in Washington history. And while I would like to say that there may be a friendly rivalry, it's friendly. And certainly, we need many, many more centers about research— —absolutely, absolutely— —dealing with Blacks in America——absolutely. So that, I mean, in the final analysis there is so much to do and so much work ahead of us that there's no real sense of competition. We almost need a Schomburg Center in Chicago and in Detroit and Los Angeles and Houston, Texas, and Atlanta, Georgia, and a few other places— —well, absolutely— —now, I understand Tuskegee has some interesting materials. Tuskegee Institute [crosstalk] of Tuskegee, Alabama— —yes, yes— —because for years they published the "Negro Yearbook"—which was a fact book—which dealt with various concerns around Blacks. As we come to the close of the program, what are your most urgent needs now that you have the building or will have the building? What are your urgent financial needs and how do you plan to get some of those met? Well, I would focus in on two needs: One, we're in the midst of a fundraising campaign to raise matching funds to match a grant that we have from the National Endowment for the Humanities. That grant has enabled us to do many of these things I've talked about, in terms of conservation and preservation and organization of the collection. And we're ending the nee—[coughs]—we're nearing the end of that drive and so we need a final push towards funds. So that's direct. The second major need is the building itself. Just those final things to make the building as superb as we hope it is, in terms of furnishings, paintings, whatever. That is our second major need. And, of course, anyone again who's interested in donation—not only materials but of money—to these various funds, should contact the Schomburg at 862-4000. Right. Our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason" has been Ruth Ann Stewart, who's Assistant Curator of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture of the New York Public Library. And we've been talking about the plans for this excellent new building—which will be on Lenox Avenue between 135th and 136th Street—and how it will contribute to this explosion of collection, or this explosion of materials, in Black culture. Ruth Ann, it's been very nice having you with us on tonight's "Soul of Reason." Well, on behalf of the staff the Schomburg, we thank you very much. You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. [outro music begins] "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

