Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:00:01.470
In today's world the Black community is faced with an inordinate number of mental health problems. Hear Dr. Lester Alston, psychologist, discuss the various ways in which the mental health problems of Blacks can be approached on tonight's SOUL OF REASON. [intro music begins]

Announcer 00:00:36.810
This is SOUL OF REASON. A program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:03.420
With us this evening on SOUL OF REASON is Dr. Lester Alston, a clinical psychologist who is associate professor of education at Baruch College of the City University. Les, glad to have you with us tonight to talk about this very important problem.

Lester Alton 00:01:16.020
Glad to be here Roscoe.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:01:17.340
And as we said at the beginning of the show: in today's world -- probably even more so than the world of the 30s, and 40s, even the 20s -- the Black community is faced with a lot more mental health problems. So could you begin the show by indicating from your experience and your reading and so on, the range of mental health problems that Black people face. And we can talk about Black people [in New York?], but let's just talk about Black people generally. What it was the range of mental health problems that they face?

Lester Alton 00:01:48.450
Well I think the range is much wider than it was in the decades that you mentioned. I also think the expression of problems ... of different kinds of problems ... are much more varied. And I think Blacks, just as other groups, are now somewhat more aware of what constitutes a mental health problem; and accordingly they can identify it and, when necessary, seek help for it.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:02:19.470
I think that's a good point. You hit upon something that I think is happening through the media in particular, the awareness of everyone ... of mental health problems. No longer do we hide our mentally ill behind walls in the back room. True many of our institutions are not as advanced as they ought to be. And as a matter of fact we aren't even institutionalizing a lot of people; but people are becoming much more aware of mental health problems. Now when we talk about mental health problems are you talking about things that deal with people's anxieties or fears or hallucinations, or are you just talking about the fact that they can't get along with each other.

Lester Alton 00:03:00.390
I think it's mostly the latter. The kinds of problems that used to eventuate ... and hallucinations ... and ... and things like that -- the more serious psychotic manifestations -- aren't in evidence that much anymore. I'm talking more now about people not being able to get along with each other ... people not being able to function ... youngsters not being able to learn ... families not being able to remain together, intact, productive. It's those kinds of things that constitute the bulk of mental health problems at this time.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:03:36.460
That really is interesting because you say that problems like hallucinations, or paranoia, or schizophrenia -- you know the really serious acting out problems -- you're suggesting that they don't exist in the degree to which they existed before? Or are you suggesting that we have methods of controlling them so that they don't appear to be a serious.

Lester Alton 00:03:59.370
They don't appear to be as serious, because when these kinds of symptoms occur, people get help. Often pharmaceutical, or psycho-pharmaceutical, and those more serious flagrant symptoms can be curtailed. They can be suppressed. So there are many people who are ambulatory today who would have been in hospitals 20 years ago. So the sense is that they're not as much in evidence because of the suppression by ... by drugs.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:04:35.160
But the kind of things that result in families splitting up; people becoming involved in drugs; child abuse; alcoholism; wife beating -- if we want to be a sexist is to look at something like that -- those are the kinds of things that you're really dealing with now in terms of mental health.

Lester Alton 00:04:58.290
They're increasing. People are more aware of them. We recognize them now more as as mental health problems. You touched on one, child abuse, which has gotten a lot of attention recently; at one time it was sort of felt that one could be sort of overbearing if one wished, in how one handled a child even to the extent of using physical force on a child, but now it's recognized that a parent who does that -- and does it excessively -- is demonstrating some kind of mental unfitness; it's a kind of ... it's a mental problem. So a problem that didn't exist before is now being defined as such because of a new awareness ... a new way of looking at how we express ourselves.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:05:42.370
Now in your role as a clinical psychologist and as a professor of education, you are very much concerned with those kind of things that interfere with children's learning, and not only children's learning -- you work at a college -- college students' learning. What are some of those things ... and what are some of the things that are being done about them?

Lester Alton 00:06:03.231
Well without talking ... without discussing the whole general area of deprivation and its effect on learning, I'm thinking more of the kind of thing where, within the home, there may be so many impediments to natural living -- there may be so many stresses ... there may be so many economic conditions that ... that ... that ... that put quite a strain on the family -- that any kind of a learning atmosphere is rather difficult. And that is as true for the six year old, as it's true for the ... the fifteen year old high school student, or the nineteen year old college student. In general the home atmosphere is one of stress -- we might even say psychopathology -- and therefore the youngster is under a great deal of strain and those people in the family who might be able to create a learning atmosphere for him, or certainly assist in that process, can't do it. And in many cases the learning of the child represents a threat to the family and for that reason it's somewhat resisted.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:07:10.760
Well some of this goes back to what some sociologists and even historians have said to the economic system in which we live which causes Black families in America to earn only 62 percent of what white families earn. And a tremendous amount of stress, particularly in terms of the male head of the house. This has led to a large extent to a fairly large number of Black families being headed by women; by males going through a number of acting out behaviors because of the fact that they don't feel they can take care of their family. And this goes right back to the economic roots of our society: that Black people -- through the discrimination and the racism that exist -- have not been able to gain the type of economic sufficiency to run a kind of family and to give a kind of structure which would enable them to deal with some of these root problems. Now we know that middle class people have a large number of family problems as well but they are more related to things like status rather than to just being able to provide the basic economic sufficiency. So much so, that as I have observed approaches to dealing with family and student problems and the like not only do we have clinical psychologists involved but we have social workers and family counselors who begin to work around such things as the awareness of the economic situation: ways of improving it ... ways of sharing ... ways of understanding the impact of racism on the very structure of the Black family. But to what extent, in your experience, are Black people becoming more aware of the fact that what they do to themselves ... to each other ... is a function of what society has done to Black people?

Lester Alton 00:09:00.890
I think they ... I think we're very aware at this point Roscoe; but being aware hasn't necessarily led to the solutions that are ... that are necessary. I think that the entire movement of the 60s and the very early 70s indicated that the awareness was there. In fact taking a look at different kinds of disturbances and pathologies among Blacks there are many people who are willing to say now that in almost all cases they are tied up with the social milieu and the social disadvantages and the situation of Black people in this country. The expression is that way. We might take something like ... that seems like suicide. There are now theories about suicide among Blacks -- which as you might know is increasing particularly among younger Blacks -- there are theories which look at suicide and the reasons for it quite differently than it's looked at in whites. And it's sort of seen as an expression of anger and rage at conditions and a lot of that is self directed ... it's inner directed; whereas in many cases other kinds of suicides are seen as a feeling of hopelessness ... lack of opportunity, or lack of wanting to live. In one case it's a very angry kind of suicide. The other case it's a ... it's simply a passive kind of final gesture that a person makes.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:10:31.311
On SOUL OF REASON we discuss the conditions in the Black community with a variety of types of people: with artists, with politicians, social workers, educators, physicians, etc.. Your particular area of expertise is psychology -- dealing with people's behavior and life. Yet at the same time you bring up, and you acknowledge, the serious impact of the economic conditions -- and I would say the racism -- which brings about those on the Black family and on the Black community... would suggest that what we call a pathology might be a perfectly normal reaction to a very difficult and stressful situation. Which then raises the question is: do we have to wait for improvement in the economic conditions of Black people to be able to deal more adequately with these various mental health problems?

Lester Alton 00:11:31.120
Well I don't think we can afford to wait. I think we've got to make every possible creative, innovative attempt to deal with them; despite the fact that the economic conditions might change -- and might change very, very slowly. I think among Black professionals in the field we've got to think about ways of delivering services certainly, and creating a milieu for people who ... who... who need help. And although we can recognize that economic conditions might be at the focus -- in that to some extent we're we're working against the system -- we've got to do what we can within that area... within those resources.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:12:14.220
Of course, that's a perfectly logical and responsible answer. On the other hand as an intellectual who has to step aside and look at the issue in its larger terms, do you think that it is really going to be possible to re-socialize ... re-educate ... rehabilitate ... readjust the patterns in Black family life -- and Black mental health life -- until some really significant economic progress is made? I'm relating to Herb Gutman's book... by Dr. Gutman who was on the show talking about his book THE BLACK FAMILY AND SLAVERY AND FREEDOM, and he pointed up that how when we had slavery and it was legalized, etc. the Black family did hold together and even though marriages weren't consummated by law they were in fact consummated by spirit and by religion. And these families did a number of things to reinforce themselves and begin to develop. And it was in response to the racism that came about in [the] post-reconstruction period, and the early 20th century, and eventually the migration to the cities; that the Black family began to get these stresses where they couldn't really deal with them because the social system in which they were operating was one in which the economic exploitation was extremely great and they had very little reso... recourse in slavery. At least on plantations, many times, they could hold back their labor they could set up the pace. When you move into the city and when you depended upon your employer -- whether a domestic employee or an employee in a factory -- to maneuver you you become very, very subject to a ... the various forces that lead to this type of schizophrenic behavior that so many people have in our society. So the question is: is it really going to be possible to change the basic mental health patterns in the Black community without having significant improvement in the economic status of Black people?

Lester Alton 00:14:24.130
Not to repeat ... but before we answer... I think it's possible. I think it's possible. I think it's possible to alleviate some of ... of the ... the disturbance and the pathology that's there. I say that because I have a feeling that despite the fact that general economic conditions have changed, possibly for the better, between nineteen... say... seventy-five and nineteen forty, I think the Black family in cities was much more intact in the 1940s, you see. And I think it's an additional set of pressures -- and I can't identify what they ... what they are -- that may have caused the sudden -- what can we call it? -- regression in any kind of movement that they might have been making. So I don't think ... I would like to see significant improvement ... but I don't think that the improvement in Black families must necessarily await that significant improvement. I think things can be done short of that. I think it must be done short of that.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:15:30.251
This evening on SOUL OF REASON we are talking with Dr. Lester Alston who is a clinical psychologist and associate professor of education at Baruch College of the City University of New York; and we're talking about the various mental health problems that the Black community faces and various approaches that might be used in dealing with these problems. And as you were responding to the question about the relationship between the mental health problems and economic conditions of Blacks, it does provide another thesis ... another hypothesis ... that some sociologists have taken: and that is that when the Black community -- regardless of whether it is being discriminated against or not -- is able to mobilize its own resources to do things for itself whether it be through its churches, or through its social organizations, or, more recently, through its political organizations, that it begins to develop a sense of respect and concern for each other which tends to mediate some of these intra-family and intra-personal conflicts. Is that the theory that you're suggesting? Are you suggesting that as Black people become more involved in dealing with their own destiny that they will in fact have fewer mental health problems?

Lester Alton 00:16:45.830
I think so and I think that we're talking about shorter term changes rather than long term changes and we're talking about certain kinds of forces that act over the short period rather than over the the longer period. For instance many ... it's my impression that the disruption of the 60s caused a certain kind of diminution in certain kinds of disturbances seen by Blacks; whereas others remained at the same level. Those things have changed. I think the suicide rate started ... the suicide rate started to increase during the the period of the 60s in youngsters. I think fewer Black families -- or pathology within Black families -- was in evidence in the sixties when that was happening; but once that ferment ended I think the trend towards the dissolution and the disrepair in Black families began to increase.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:17:43.730
But how would you respond to this suggestion? That the way in which our welfare and health services and helping services are delivered through our bureaucratic institutions -- our welfare departments, our health departments, etc. -- tend to move the Black families attention from dealing with these things themselves over into depending upon again the great White Father; and this too tends to bring about a kind of disorganization and disorientation, and certainly as our various poverty and other programs have accelerated in the late 60s and early 70s that in fact has happened. How do you respond to that as another explanation?

Lester Alton 00:18:23.120
Well I think that's particularly true. I think it's very true, for instance, when we look at the instance of a Black going to a clinic for some kind of help, a lot of the help that's given by many of the social servi... services is ... gets doled out. It's ... it's ... it's ... it's handed out; there's very little activity involved in it. In fact it almost seems as if the provider of the service wants as little contact with the client as possible. And quite often when a Black group goes to a clinic for help with mental problems they expect the same kind of treatment. It will be some kind of a prescription given over; it'll be a word or two and somehow things will get better and of course that doesn't happen. But that kind of receptiveness or passivity does tend to become infectious, I suppose, and I think that it operates in the expectations about mental health service as well as it does in other kinds of service.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:19:28.760
And that's an insight that I've heard other Black psychologists and social workers give in relationship to the way in which services are provided to the Black community. Which leads me to ask two questions: 1) do you think that the Black family, or the Black person, is better served by a Black therapist -- whether a social worker or a psychologist, psychiatrist -- in the milieu of whatever agency is providing the service; and 2) are there, or is there, an adequate number of Blacks helping people in the mental health services in New York City.

Lester Alton 00:20:10.880
In the first case, I think yes. I think that any agency ought to make the assumption, and ought to provide for the possibility, that a Black client coming in wants to see a Black therapist. If it turns out otherwise fine, but I think that possibility ought to be there and I don't think at this point there is any longer any question about that. Whether or not the Black is necessarily going to be more beneficial is another question; but then that would be the question about any therapist efficacy with any patient.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:20:45.321
Well you get into some real hang ups with some of our white liberal friends who believe that people -- white people or other people -- who have come from deprived backgrounds themselves and have been discriminated against, really do know what discrimination is, and really can identify fairly easily with the Black client. You're saying that there's no disagreement that it would probably be better -- everything being equal -- to try to expose a Black client to a Black therapist, or a Puerto Rican client to a Puerto Rican or other Hispanic therapist. You said that very glibly. As I get around and I hear people in the professions talk -- particularly... I hate to put it in this context, but it appears that the more liberal and the more oppressed background some of the white specialists have come from, the more they tend to feel that they can just as easily deal with the problems of Blacks, as Black professionals. I personally wonder about that, and you've raised that question. Now to what extent is that still an issue?

Lester Alton 00:21:50.530
Now, you said "just as easily," and my own feeling is that that's not the case. I think that undoubtedly -- to the extent that they've had some kind of oppression or disadvantage in their background -- they are going to be somewhat more sensitive. But my feeling is that even a Black from a middle class background is, on many counts, somewhat better able to understand... sense... empathize... feel... for the Black client whatever background than ... than the white is. So I don't think it's "just as easily." The other question you mentioned was "are there enough?" And of course, Roscoe, the answer is no. And if we had a three or a five fold increase tomorrow it still wouldn't be enough. The numbers are increasing. I think the mental health services or the mental health field is something that's attracting Blacks. Lots of people are going into psychology nowadays, Blacks among them. But the numbers are not enough. And I think they're sort of concentrated in certain areas where certain service delivery contexts...

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:05.730
You mean more social workers and psychiatrists for example?

Lester Alton 00:23:07.980
No, I mean more often than not, in the in the public institutions rather than in private agencies that deals ... that provide services. That's not bad but they are concentrated there. So we need more.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:23:25.101
Alright now, given the fact that it might be preferable to have someone who is Black dealing with these problems, and the fact that we need more: what kind of approaches might these helping people take that would be more successful in dealing with the mental health problems of Blacks? What ... what are the most successful approaches that are used in dealing with the mental health problems of Blacks?

Lester Alton 00:23:48.370
Well to some extent here I think I'd be talking about my own my own feelings and my own projections. I do think that the area of family therapy is one that ultimately will will pay off. And I think it's a kind of therapy that -- if we can use this term -- is more efficient for the kinds of problems that I think many Blacks come to clinics with. Family therapy is one: the ability to treat various compositions, various units, of a family; seeing them individually or seeing them together. I think that's necessary. But then I also think that in the therapy or in the treatment that's provided, we've got to move away from a model that emphasizes understanding -- and quite often that means long excursions into one's background to understand -- and that places, or focuses more directly on behavior change; behavior change that we can see now; behavior change it is somewhat local and is defined as a problem. In a sense I'm talking about structured kinds of therapy; and therapy that's by the design of the therapists and ... or with the knowledge of the patient is going to take place over a shorter period of time.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:25:15.370
This has been a fairly recent development in the field of the mental health therapies. The idea of dealing with the immediate problem and the therapist becoming, as you say, personally involved in a particular problem. I do know that in working with some of our students, as they work with various people in mental health services, many times they said well I went to the psychiatrist or therapist to deal with this problem and he wanted me to spend the next three months talking about my childhood. Now it's certainly true, as a trained person, you know that the person's childhood does influence their behavior. But the real question that you're dealing with, and I think the students are dealing with -- I think those families who are having problems fighting each other and so on are dealing with -- well what can you do to help me tomorrow? But again, so that the audience doesn't get the wrong impression, you're not suggesting that even with a direct action approach that the problems are going to be solved tomorrow.

Lester Alton 00:26:15.430
No, not tomorrow; but they would be solved in a way that both patient and therapist could hold, or could have some kind of notion of when they have met the problem and corrected it. You mentioned wife beating, I think, a little earlier; and it's one thing for the therapist to immediately assume that the man who's beating his wife is doing so because of something that happened when he was 3 or 5. It may be that both a therapist and the man could agree that they're going to work on the act of wife beating and spend some time on that and see if they can't establish some criteria for ending that. And if the patient feels so inclined they might then go on to some of these longer term or deeper understandings afterwards. But I'm I'm talking about the immediate behavior change that might be the focus in therapy rather than than understanding.

Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. 00:27:15.360
Okay, I think that is a very good analysis in terms of where a therapist, Black or white, has to go with the type of problems that people face in the Black community. And Les, I think you've given our audience an excellent insight into the way in which you, as a clinical psychologist, and others like yourselves who are working in the mental health field, attempt to work with these myriad of problems that the Black community faces in the mental health area. Our guest tonight on SOUL OF REASON has been Dr. Lester Alston, who is a clinical psychologist and associate professor of education at Baruch College, the City University of New York. And we've been talking about the various approaches that can be taken in dealing with the mental health problems of Blacks. Thanks again for being our guest Les Alston.

Lester Alton 00:28:05.461
Thank you Roscoe.

Announcer 00:28:07.740
You've been listening to SOUL OF REASON with your host, the director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown, Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. [outro music begins] SOUL OF REASON is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

