Music Cue 00:00:08.790
[Recording of "Loch Lomond" by Maxine Sullivan plays]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:24.180
The haunting strains of the Scotch ballad "Loch Lomond" means only one thing: Maxine Sullivan, one of our great princesses of song. On tonight's "Soul of Reason," Maxine Sullivan will discuss her views of black music today and yesterday.

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:59.430
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:26.460
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" is Ms. Maxine Sullivan, who is really one of the great princesses of song in America. Going back a few years--we won't say how many--but just a few. And I thought, Maxine, as we begin our show tonight you might sort of tell us how you feel the world of music has changed since you first began to sing in 19-dash-dash?...

Maxine Sullivan 00:01:48.240
Well actually I think we might have just about come full cycle since 19 dash-dash-dash. We've been through a little thing here with rock and things like that. I think it got to be a little bit too much. And so I think we're returning back to music a little bit. I like to feel that way.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:13.740
That's interesting because we know that, for example, you appeared in the Royal Box back in September and got fantastic reviews. People like Nellie Letcher, Eddie Haywood and several others I think--Rose Murphy--are singing again and everybody is flocking out and really digging what's happening. And this tends to tell us, as you suggest, that there is a circle coming around. Some of it might be nostalgia, but some of it might be just looking for good music because the fact is musicians and artists frequently get better as they get older...they get more nuances and they can express and so on. So you really do feel that it has changed in the sense of going in a circle.

Maxine Sullivan 00:02:58.620
Yeah...well, I'll tell you what happened you see. I retired in 1957, so I was actually out of show business for about ten years. And I got an invitation to go out to Denver to appear at Dick Gibson's Jazz Party. He has an annual festival out there in which he brings 30 to 40 musicians out there. Teddy Wilson, Bobby Hackett, Dick Hyman, and...the jazz musicians, the names that we know. So I went out and I sang. I hadn't done anything for quite some time and I was a little shaky as to how I was going to be received because I haven't changed my style...in fact, I couldn't change my style. And that was in 1968. The world's greatest jazz band was formed and they opened in New York at The Riverboat ,and I went down one night and I sang with the band and the reception was just beautiful. So Bobby Hackett happened to be in the audience and he asked me if I would open at The Riverboat with him in January, which was just a couple weeks ago. And as I said before, I was still a little shaky because I know what was happening at the time and I did not fit in with the picture that was being painted at the time. But I went in there and we stayed in there for eight weeks and the reception was beautiful, and the youngsters came and they began to enjoy it too. And since 1968 I've been going pretty strong, although I work five days a week. I do gigs on weekends and I get a chance to see the reaction of some of the younger people. They are sort of looking forward to some of the melody for a change.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:47.970
You know it's interesting, because black music is really the power behind the record industry and the music industry, and for a long time it's been the power behind what Americans have tended to call jazz and the like. And now blacks are moving into a position where they really have ascendancy, basically...the great artists are black today in this particular field. Yet there's a certain form which we tend to call "soul," which has predominated for the past few years it's moved over into rock and, as you now say, the pendulum is swinging somewhat. Now how do you feel that blacks have influenced this development from swing to bop to soul to rock, and now beginning to come back. What are some of the things that have really brought that about?

Maxine Sullivan 00:05:40.110
Well not only have they influenced it...I mean, I would go so far as to say that they are basically responsible for the music. I think that what happened, music-wise, was that we went through a lot of--what do we call it--changes. And when I say changes, the kind of changes that maybe hurt a little bit and out of that I think came some of the the soul expression that we have predominant today. And it's real, it's always been real. It's it's not a contrived sort of music, it's...it's real.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:25.780
See our music, talks about--our music, black music--talks about our hurts and our loves and our pains and our aspirations...which in a sense, I guess, is what music in most societies tells. But particularly European music, particularly the 17th and 18th century relating to the needs of royalty, did not tend to have this type of gutsiness, this type of feeling about life.

Maxine Sullivan 00:06:48.240
Well...I think that for the most part it was theater, you know? It was...that's what the music was, mostly theater, and not necessarily [having] anything to do with the emotions. It was an expression to please an audience, you see? And of course music itself, the development, and as it became more formalized, you know, the composers they just extended themselves and wrote prolifically and we wound up with some real square-type music.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:26.151
You know, so many of our black singers come out of the black church...

Maxine Sullivan 00:07:29.001
Yeah...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:29.003
...and that again expresses where we've been coming from, and so much of your recent music, both black music, soul music, and rock music, expresses the agonies and the anxieties of some of our younger people. And having gone through this--having been one of the first black singers with an integrated band, and having been the first to sing in integrated places--I was wondering if you could give us some opinions as to how things have changed, how much better they are if they are better, and what [are] some of the things that have brought this about?

Maxine Sullivan 00:08:06.990
Well let's get back to me now. I don't consider myself exactly a "soul singer." I think that I'm more of an entertainer. The first song I ever sang was "I'm Forever Blowing Bubbles" in 1919 at the Carnegie Library in Homestead, Pennsylvania...and it had absolutely nothing to do with the soul, it was just another pop tune. I thought at that time that I had talent ,you know, I was showing off like any other kid and I just sang all over the place. I found out that I could sing harmony to "Till We Meet Again" and "Avalon" and things like that, and to me it was just a musical endeavor. My family, my father...on my father's side, they all were musicians off the top of their heads. Nobody was a learned musician, but they played. My father played violin, my uncle played violin, had another uncle who played banjo and it was the back porch crowd. For the most part, as I can recall, they played more or less happy music. I didn't get started in show business until I was 27. I had sort of done everything else in between, you know, waited table and done all those things...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:34.941
That's the way things have changed: by the time a guy's 27 and gal's 27...

Maxine Sullivan 00:09:37.666
Then it's time to quit!...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:09:37.669
...they're millionaires! That's right.

Maxine Sullivan 00:09:37.671
That's right, you see...that's how things have changed. It was a little harder in those days and there wasn't too much of an incentive either...I mean, the loot was nowhere. Remember these were depression days and musicians were working gigs y'know, like, for two dollars a night...or supper. And I was just happy to go along for the ride.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:06.360
Well what about you know some of the whites like Benny Goodman who first began to bring blacks into this? I imagine they got some hassles, and I imagine the blacks got some hassles.

Maxine Sullivan 00:10:16.470
Well I was there at the time. I remember when Benny Goodman got his show, the...what was it, "Let's Dance"?...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:26.881
"Let's Dance."

Maxine Sullivan 00:10:27.541
...that's right, the NBC show. And I tell this story quite often, because I remember. The show came on at midnight, I believe, or thereabouts. Anyway there were remote broadcasts at the time, from Chicago especially, and I believe that before Benny went on Claude Hopkins and his band was on. And I think when Benny finished his show, I think it was followed by Fletcher Henderson. Benny Goodman had no alternative but to integrate that band.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:02.651
Uh-huh!

Maxine Sullivan 00:11:03.481
And of course you know then he went out and hired...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:07.940
Teddy and Lionel...

Maxine Sullivan 00:11:07.943
...Fletcher Henderson!

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:09.871
...to do his arrangements?

Maxine Sullivan 00:11:10.861
Right. And of course this is when the bands began to integrate because they needed the black arrangers.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:18.990
In other words, again it's that force that comes from black music that brought them around to, as you say, the necessity of hiring black musicians in this instance.

Maxine Sullivan 00:11:27.511
You can call it whatever you want to, it was...it wound up to be a real dollars and cents type deal. Because the bands could offer--Tommy Dorsey and Benny Goodman could offer--the boys, the arrangers, more money and they had to take advantage of the offer. And then of course the black bands began to disintegrate.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:50.370
Of course that, in a sense, to put a parallel in education, some of the things that's happening to education--black colleges, for example--are having much more difficulty because more and more white colleges are taking more and more black students. And in a sense that's...you see progress. On the other hand, you see something that you've worked very hard to support falling apart. But in those days there was tremendous segregation in accommodations, eating places and so on. And one of the questions that would come up is: how did you and some of the other black performers who were working in this milieu adapt to this? Because there's a certain loss of humanity to work with people every day and then to have to go around the back to get something to eat. And I think particularly for some of our younger audience it would be important to reflect on how you really felt about that how you dealt with it and so on.

Maxine Sullivan 00:12:48.390
Well, in the beginning I worked mainly in clubs and I worked for extended engagements. In fact my longest engagements were in New York City and I and I lived here. However, when I went on the road, I went on the road with Benny Carter in 1941 and we covered twenty-three states in six weeks.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:13:13.411
Wow.

00:13:14.261
One night stands. And of course the farther away from New York you got, the harder it became. Of course in those days when we traveled, our accommodations were usually furnished by the local citizens because hotel accommodations were just not there. And we stayed at different individual's homes. And even in Chicago, I recall...when we hit Chicago, I was working in a theater there. I hate to even repeat the story because it's so, so crazy. I had been eating in the theater having my dinner brought into the theater. And...so this particular day I decided to go out and go into a restaurant and eat. I went into a little snack stand and I sat there. I had a girl with me and I ordered something like a hot dog, you know, hot dog or something like that. And it took forever, you know, for me to get waited on and I didn't even think, I didn't even think what was going on. And I finally said, "Gee, I mean somethings the matter." I called the gal, said, "Look I want a hot dog." And she just ignored me and the next thing I knew somebody was comin' and saying, "They don't want to serve you in here." Now that sounds a little far fetched in these days. I mean I don't think that the average kid...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:52.292
--really even has an understanding...

Maxine Sullivan 00:14:53.870
...would even believe it, believe it...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:55.801
--which is a reflection......but it happened. ...of some of the progress that we've made. But as your career has developed you've done some very interesting things, and one of the things that I find very fascinating is something that you did with Dick Hyman in setting some of William Shakespeare's poetry and songs to music. And I thought it might be an interesting interlude for us to listen to one of them, "Lawn as White as Driven Snow" from "The Winter's Tale." And this is really very fascinating. That was beautiful. And as you said, Shakespeare would be doing a little jumping in his grave. But I say: if he was around, he'd probably be writing like that. That was really right on. I think Dick did a wonderful job I mean he didn't take too much away from the lyrics...it's quite mischievous, you know, and I'm crazy about the album. This is really a fantastic idea. Some of the other things on the album come from "Twelfth Night:" "When That I Was" and "Little Boy," or "Mistress Mind" from "Twelfth Night". This is the one we all know: "Blow Blow Thou Winter Wind" from "As You Like It." These are really very, very fascinating things. And the thing that I find very fascinating about you and many people who have been in entertainment, in show business...their other lives are also very constructive. You work in education. You've been chairman of a local board of education and you've helped to create innovations...I believe your district is in the Bronx. Is that right? That's right. We're in Community School District 12. When I retired in 1957 my daughter was graduating from elementary school, so I joined the PTA. Good mother. Wow. That's where I spent the ten years when I wasn't singing. I became the president of the parents association. I became secretary for the East Bronx Community Council, and I wound up on the community school board. And then when they added districts to the Bronx, in fact what they did was made more districts out of the districts that we already had, because we were working in two districts called Districts 17 and 18, and both districts were quite large. And so they sort of did a little redistricting like they're doing now in the legislature. And we wound up with six districts instead of the original five. So then this is when we got District 12. And by that time I had been on this school board for about five years. In the last year I was on there, I became the chairman and it was during this time that we were able to get Dr. Edythe Gaines in as our superintendent. And Dr. Gaines now is Vice Chancellor of the whole city system. Yeah. Well we're pretty proud of her. We were very, very lucky to get her, too. And I do know that through the efforts of the school board and the parents association and the professional staff, District 12 has created some very innovative programs...as a matter of fact, they have one going on now. Yeah well the present program is called the Urban Rural School Development Program. It's a staff training program and we have just three schools [that] are involved: two elementary schools and a junior high school. And at the present time we have three programs going simultaneously. We have a 42-member school community council, and the council members are being trained under...in a diagnostic training program under the data transformation systems. And this is where I met Dr. Miller. And we also have a Fordham program in now. And of course staff includes teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, and community people, and students. So everybody in the community is considered staff. Our problem is that we just don't have enough money or enough programs to accommodate everybody. But we work on a quota system and we have a certain number of professionals, certain number of paraprofessionals, and a certain number of community people. And right now the program--this is the third year--and it's becoming very popular. And other schools in our district are not only interested, they want to get in the act and... Well that's true, because this team approach really is hitting a lot of things. You have a team approach in health services, where you have paramedical specialist and community people and your nurses and your physicians working together. And in education, and as you mentioned, including students as well as staff of all types paraprofessional, professional staff. This is the development of the future, and I think you're very fortunate to be in a district that had the creativity part of it generated by you to seek out a program like this. Well under decentralization it becomes all the more important that those people that are involved get more involved. We know very well that the majority of the professionals do not live in the community That's true in most communities. And there has been quite a bit of conflict because of this lack of communication. A lot of our staff members--I'm speaking now of the professional staff members--live in entirely different neighborhoods. And not only that, their training, their formal training, does not include living in the ghetto... --or relating to some of the [unintelligible]. --and this has been some of the problems. Understanding...and on the other hand, the community people don't necessarily understand the professionals. There has to be a happy medium, there has to be a meeting ground there somewhere, or else you're going to wind up with conflict all over the place and these conflicts exist, they're real, they're going to be some that remain but there's gonna be a little softening up the process there. Everybody's learning. The interactive process leads to that. But as we come toward the close of the show, I would like to hear what advice you would give to aspiring young singers. Well I say keep singing. OK, that's number one. It took me 27 years to get started and I never gave up. I don't think that the singers of today have as much problem, as much hardship getting into show business as it used to be. The only thing about it is now I believe that their careers are short lived, because the media there's... They burn them up. There's so many outlets for talent. And of course television, records they just eat up the talent. They just burn us off. So what you do is: get the money and run. OK. Well as we go out on the show, I'd like to hear Maxine Sullivan doing "Jeepers Creepers," which Louis did and a lot of people did. You know I was in the picture with Louis. Right on. OK. "Jeepers Creepers." We've been talking with Maxine Sullivan who from "Loch Lomond" to "Jeepers Creepers" through William Shakespeare has told us something and sung us something about music--black music, all music--and also about what it means to be a citizen and to do what has to be done to help make our education system and our society run better. And I'd like thank you Maxine for being our guest on tonight's "Soul of Reason". It's been a real pleasure. Thank you. And good luck in what you want to be doing because after this and some of the other things you've been doing I know that on some weekends we'll be walking in one of these clubs and be hearing the strains of "Loch Lomond", "Jeepers Creepers". Oh yeah. Oh yeah. You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Public Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

