Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.800
This is "Soul of Reason." A program that tells what's happening in Black America. Each week on NBC leaders and movers in the black community visit "Soul of Reason" to discuss important issues of concern to Black New Yorkers. I'm your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Adjunct Professor of Education at New York University and President of Bronx Community College of the City University of New York.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:25.020
With us this evening on "Soul of Reason" is Roger Wilkins whose urban affairs columnist of New York Times and a good friend of long-standing. Glad to have you with us tonight Roger.

Roger Wilkins 00:00:34.561
I'm glad to be here.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:36.451
Well, you have been writing some very incisive analytical pieces recently in The New York Times in your capacity as Urban Affairs Columnist. And you certainly have been dealing with the first thing we want to talk about, which I think is something that everyone in Black America and America as a whole wants to know, and that is what has been the impact of the Carter administration on problems affecting the Black community-- and I would want to englarge that-- affecting the urban communities of this country many of which are predominantly Black ,and all of which have tremendous numbers of Black and Hispanic people.

Roger Wilkins 00:01:14.850
Roscoe, you know I have recently as almost all journalists do at the end of a president's first year, found myself summing up Carter's first year. And to my amazement, I have concluded that he's been a pretty good president. The one area where I think he flunks is the area that you talked about. And I think he flunked very badly. He has been unable in the first year to fashion an urban policy. He has even been unable to articulate the principles on which he would like his urban policy to be based. He made all kinds of promises to Black Americans. He told me when he was running, when I interviewed him, that when he got through being president he wanted Black people and all minority people to remember him as the president who did more for them than any other president in their lifetimes.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:26.441
Now I heard him say that several times.

Roger Wilkins 00:02:28.461
And the fact is that Blacks delivered their votes in substantial numbers, when he got in, he didn't know what to do. Partially, he became domestically much more conservative than he had been in the campaign. He wanted to reassure business. He began to worry more about inflation than unemployment. He, he got very testy with Vernon Jordan, when in July Jordan said what I think is correct, that Carter hadn't delivered on his promises. He was insulting, not only to Jordan, but to all Black people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:14.930
He was patronizing

Roger Wilkins 00:03:14.933
Yeah. And it was it was almost like saying, 'Boy you've got no right to speak up to me.' On abortion, he's been abysmal. The notion that Medicaid can't pay for abortions for poor women, but can pay for other medical procedures. That poor women have the same constitutional right to abortions that rich women have, but that poor women can't get them. It's obscene. And for the president then blithely to say, well, "life is unfair,"" Life was unfair"

Roger Wilkins 00:03:52.684
was insulting, ugly, stupid and foolish. On the other hand, he has done a couple of decent things in urban affairs. One of the biggest programs for urban America is the Community Development Block Grant Program. That money is, has been in the past distributed without much regard to whether a community needed it or not, just had to be there. Well the Carter administration did change the formula so that the poorer cities, the older the needier cities, will get more money. They did initiate a, an Action Grant Program of four hundred million dollars a year for three years to revitalize really dilapidated parts of old cities

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:47.542
Pparticularly the South Bronx.

Roger Wilkins 00:04:48.891
Well places like the South Bronx. And they have they've passed a billion dollars jobs program. I think one of the bright spots is the Labor Department where Ray Marshall is really a, able bright fellow. He's got Ernie Green, one of the Little Rock students as Assistant Secretary of Labor, and Ernie is an extraordinarily able man.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:12.450
And I think some of the audience, particularly some of the young members really want to know what you mean when you say one of the Little Rock students.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:17.662
[Laughs]

Roger Wilkins 00:05:17.662
Since this is one of the historic episodes in the civil rights struggle of Black America, maybe you might mention Ernie's identification with that.

Roger Wilkins 00:05:26.991
Well, in 1958. I believe it was.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:32.070
57.

Roger Wilkins 00:05:32.271
Was it 57?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:05:33.092
Yeah. Eisenhower sent in troops to Little Rock High School.

00:05:36.441
The NAACP had sued to desegregate the schools in Little Rock, and Little Rock Central was the school that was going to be desegregated. The parents and the students didn't want those Black kids in there, and there were either seven or nine black kids who were going to integrate the school. There was so much violence and so much resistance that the president had to send, President Eisenhower ,had to send troops down to protect the kids. And it took just all kinds of courage for those 16, 17, 15-year-old kids to go to that school. Ernie was one of them, and he was bright then, and he's more than bright now. He's an extraordinarily able public servant.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:25.101
And of course that is something that when we look at how far Black people have come. Even though we have these really tragic problems of unemployment and urban blight, the fact that this year I think I read that the football team at Central High School in Little Rock Arkansas, about two thirds of the starting players were Black, half the cheerleaders were Black, the president of the student body was black, and this in Little Rock Arkansas. And then you can multiply this over and over again, in particular if anyone is a sports fan, and you look at the All Black team for the University of Alabama, and the black quarterback.

Roger Wilkins 00:07:03.460
I tell you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:03.463
In Ole Miss.

Roger Wilkins 00:07:04.630
You remember Roscoe when we were when a long time ago when you and I were young, and you look at TV and there were two teams playing, and you didn't have any particular affiliation with either one of them. So you rooted for the team with the most blacks, or you rooted against the team from the Deep South.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:22.010
That's right. You rooted for the team from the North.

Roger Wilkins 00:07:23.601
Well it just blows my mind now to

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:26.092
Root for Alabama.

Roger Wilkins 00:07:26.990
Yeah ,it really does. [laughter]

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:29.991
And the thing is some of the younger people in the audience who didn't grow up with this say, 'Well why wouldn't you root for. But I like Alabama I like their style. I got a good quarterback. They they got good players.'

Roger Wilkins 00:07:41.690
Well the thing about Alabama you remember was that Autherine Lucy back in about 62 was taken to integrate the University of Alabama.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:51.251
George Wallace stood at the door.

Roger Wilkins 00:07:52.730
George Wallace stood at the door and blocked the way for Autherine Lucy and the Attorney General of the United States.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:57.720
And that catapulted the then governor George Wallace into national prominence as a symbol of white resistance.

Roger Wilkins 00:08:05.760
I'll tell you, it's still, I still have trouble thinking about Bear Bryant coach and all these Black football players but it happens.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:11.540
Well of course this has to do in part with what you talked about the economic benefits to in an economic situation. When white America wakes up, and I think they are beginning to wake up, what happens to the lowest person on the economic scale in the black community. It affects the overall country. They will begin to support actions. I think it's beginning to happen to turn the situation around the creeping urban blight of the South Bronx can affect any city. It can affect Pittsburgh and Chicago and Los Angeles, any city in this country. And what it takes to reverse the social excesses in terms of crime and low education and lack of employability from that can help, but hurt the country particularly as we now beginning to get competition from well-trained people in Taiwan, and Japan, and West Germany, and eventually Africa itself. So that what happens to Backs individually can affect what happens to the nation collectively. And in this football situation, for years the Black players from the South would go to Ohio State, and Michigan, and Michigan State, and every year they'd beat the teams, all-white teams from the South. And finally Bear Bryant said to Duffy Daugherty, who was then the coach of Michigan State, said, 'Look we're going to start keeping our guys because it doesn't make any difference what the color is, it's how fast he could run, and how he can tackle, and how he can play the ballgame.' Well it's the same thing is true in the economy. It really doesn't make a difference what the color of the bank teller or the airline pilot or the advertising executive is, it's what he or she can do in the labor market. And the problem that I see particularly being in education is the negative effects of the poor quality of education that so many Black and other poor people, which means Chicano and Puerto Rican and poor whites get, hurts our economy. Because then when you go to hire a bank teller or you go to hire an airline clerk, they can't write a clear sentence or a clear statement. They can't total up your deposit slip or your ticket, or they can't work at direction. It isn't that these folks are incapable intellectually, because basically intelligence is all over the place with everyone. So we have a very serious problem which I think you're right in saying that the Carter administration has given us absolutely no leadership on. Maybe that's over overstatement but I will stand on it for the moment.

Roger Wilkins 00:10:50.030
Well I'd make two points about what you've just said. First going from sports, I think that athletics, entertainment, and politics has given white Americans a distorted view of how much progress blacks have made.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:15.931
I think that's an excellent observation.

Roger Wilkins 00:11:18.181
You know that Walt Frazier makes half a million dollars a year playing basketball and wears mink coats around and has a Rolls Royce. It makes you forget that the Black unemployment rate is twice-- not just twice what the white rate is which it's been for many years-- it's twice what it was 10 years ago. The gap between Black and white income has narrowed in this last decade by exactly one percentage point.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:11:54.512
That's right, from 57 to 58 percent.

Roger Wilkins 00:11:57.011
That's exactly right. So that, although what the 60s did really was to permit Blacks like you, like me, who would have made a decent living anyway to go farther than we otherwise would have. Had the 60s not occurred, you would not be a college president probably. Had the 60s not occurred, I would not be a columnist for The New York Times. But we wouldn't be on welfare. We'd be...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:12:25.091
I might have been a president of a Black college, and you might have been writing for a black paper.

Roger Wilkins 00:12:29.650
That's right. But the point is that for a large mass of Black people, America hasn't really changed very much. That's the first point I'd make. And then I'd move from there to your point about education. To cite what I consider to be one of the most outrageous blind spots in the Carter administration. Poor Black kids come from homes in which parents don't read. You and I know all kinds of parents, Black and white, who sit with their two and three-year old kids, read them books, point out words, point out animals, just help them learn to read and to become familiar with books. The kids see the parents sitting with newspapers, with books ,with magazines. Poor parents can't do that. Poor parents don't do that. They're spending too much time just surviving. Well when that poor kid gets to school, he's already two or three years behind where a middle class kid would be, where your kid would be or my kid would be. The government has a program called Title 1 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act which is designed to remedy that, designed to remedy it in a number of ways. It puts reading machines into special classrooms. It puts extra materials into classrooms. It puts paraprofessionals into classrooms so the kids can get one-on-one help. And where it has been tried and where the money gets to the poor kids, it works. I mean I've been up to my old junior high school up in Harlem. I've seen it work. When the people from HEW went into the White House and in the Bureau of the Budget and said, 'Look this works for poor kids. Give us more money.' People in the Bureau of the Budget and the White House said, 'Well why does it cost more to educate a poor kid than a rich kid.' Well that's just flatly stupid. And as far as I know they have not increased the money for Title 1. Well if there is anything that is important to poor Blacks, poor Chicanos, poor whites, poor people period, it is getting those kids to read, getting those kids to compute, getting those kids a chance. It gives a sense that they can participate in this world by reading the paper, by figuring out a column of numbers. For the Carter administration to be unwilling to do that, it seems to me is just unspeakable.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:15:27.280
And tonight on "Soul of Reason," we are talking with Roger Wilkins, Urban Affairs Columnist of The New York Times. And as you were saying Roger, the Carter administration apparently has a blind spot in relationship to education and its role in the economic and social development of the country. In a sense, Jimmy Carter has a populist streak. You know, a populist streak which is to be economical, and to work hard, and if you believe in the best, the best will happen. The fact is that in a complex society-- let's look at the problems in New York City-- believing is not enough, as our new mayor Ed Koch is finding out. True there are excesses. Maybe there's some cards that some officials have that they shouldn't have, and maybe there's some salaries that are being paid that are too high. But the fact is that what this city needs and what Black people need, and Hispanic people, poor white people need, is a commitment by laying dollars on the line to do the kind of thing that are going to change our society and our economy. I think the Carter administration is right in one thing. And I think Pat Harris who is the Secretary of Housing Urban Development, the only Black member of the Cabinet, if you exclude Andy Young as a member of Cabinet, is right. She said that the best way to rehabilitate the South Bronx or Bushwick or Bedford Stuyvesant or the South Side of Chicago is by providing jobs. Because out of jobs and people have the money to enter into the housing market and to compete appropriately. And in that sense, the Carter administration has recognized this. But they have not recognized that crucial link between education and jobs, and I would say in the final analysis, private investments. There has been de-investment in our cities. All of our major banks have invested two-thirds of the resources that they get from the city outside of the city. And that's a conservative figure in some sense. What do you think now, and as we begin 1978, is the mood of the elected constituencies, elected officials and their constituencies, regarding public moneys to be a lever, a catalyst for private investment and development in our urban communities.

Roger Wilkins 00:17:53.570
Well I think that the central thrust of whatever it is that President Carter is thinking about for urban America is exactly that. It's using public money in the form of soft loans,in the form of tax incentives, tax breaks ,tax forgiveness, tax credits, to encourage businesses that are already in the center cities to stay there or other businesses that are outside the center cities to return. They hope thereby to create a lot of new jobs in the cities. That's good as far as it goes. But it surely doesn't go far enough because the flat clear fact is that the American economy does not sop up all of the labor that is available. And let's go back for a minute. You know, the problems of our center cities as far as as Blacks are concerned didn't start up North, they started down south. And...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:12.900
They started three or four generations ago.

Roger Wilkins 00:19:15.651
Oh that's right. But let's just go back to the 40s. A lot of Blacks worked as sharecroppers on the farms. They didn't make much, but they had things to do and they ate, and it was a terrible existence. It was semi-peonage. When the machines came along and agro business took over, those people weren't, they weren't needed anymore. So just like any other kinds of immigrants they came to New York and Chicago and other places which had been described to them by earlier immigrants as lands of opportunity. But what happened to them, they got caught in a terrible trick, it's catch 22. When they got here, the labor intensive kinds of industries were becoming less labor intensive and we're moving out of cities. So those unneeded people sloshed up North. Now they're in the cities. Now some people like Roger Star, my former colleague on the Editorial Board of The Times says, 'Well let's send them down to the Southwest.' Well Southwest doesn't need them. Fact is, says Sar Levitan one of the best labor economists in this country told me the other day, the economy, the private economy of this country doesn't need an awful lot of these people for productivity. Until the public policymakers begin to understand that, and understand that if these people are going to have productive lives that you're going to have to create government jobs for them to do. Because surely there's plenty of stuff out there. I mean if you

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:20:51.990
All you have to do is look at the streets or look at the hospitals or anything else.

Roger Wilkins 00:20:53.511
Exact. But until the policy makers understand that the private economy is not going to do it all, can't do it all, won't do it all, and the trickle down theory is not going to solve this problem, we're still going to have it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:05.760
Well of course the argument against that, in terms of the public service approach toward meeting the job problem, and as you know the Carter administration is I think they're talking about creating something like a million or so public service jobs, is that as public bureaucracies are presently constituted, these public service jobs frequently become boondoggles or all make work situations, and also are time-limited. And of course what Levitan is talking about and what you're talking about is a change in the basic economic philosophy of the country whereby these public service type jobs don't be, aren't just time-limited or a finger in the dike jobs, but they come a basic part of the overall economy. And leading to that, with the unfortunate death of Senator Humphrey ,is certainly going to be an emotional push to pass the Humphrey-Hawkins Bill. That's the so-called full employment bill which suggests that the government is the employer of last resort, and when the unemployment rate falls below a certain point, X number of public service jobs are created. Which has a built-in problem in that if you're talking about people building meaningful lives, and so they have public service jobs where the unemployment rate is 7 percent, but they don't have when the unemployment rate is five point eight percent. So that is a certain fallacy within the bill itself. But what is your opinion about the bill, and also what do you think its chances for passage are?

Roger Wilkins 00:22:38.280
Well, I think you're right. The reason we haven't had decent public service job programs is by and large because the country doesn't believe in full employment, and it doesn't believe in public service jobs. I think the major impact of the Humphrey-Hawkins Bill is that it will commit the country for the first time to full employment. And I think it'll have a very large psychological impact.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:07.380
But you remember, you really forget a little of your history, and doing some research on Humphrey-Hawkins I found that in 1946 Harry Truman issued an executive order which established the policy of full employment for the country. And some people say that the preamble to Humphrey-Hawkins is almost word for word what it is...

Roger Wilkins 00:23:27.211
Well it is. The the spiritual father of Humphrey-Hawkins is not Hubert Humphrey or Gus Hawkins, it's Leon Keyserling. Leon Keyserling was the director of the Bureau of the Budget for Harry Truman. Leon Keyserling wrote that executive order. The difference between an executive order and an act of Congress is that the executive order is just what the president says. An act of Congress means that 535 people from all over the country

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:23:54.510
Representing the whole country.

Roger Wilkins 00:23:54.516
have to think about it, have to wrestle with it, have to deal with it, with their constituents, and therefore it really gets much more deeply into the psyche of the country. So I think it's enormously important. I agree with you that it's not going to be magic. There are flaws in it, but I'm for it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:14.401
Now my public posture has been that probably the most important step that we can take at this point is to secure passage of the Humphrey-Hawkins Bill. On the other hand having made those statements, I've become aware of some of the actual realities in terms of its ultimate impact on its immediate and ultimate impact on the employment situation in the country. Now as we relate this then to the future of Blacks in America, and as we relate it to the future the Carter administration, it does turn us around to the question which you wrote about a few days ago in the Times about Black leadership itself. How does Black leadership articulate with this need of the black community? There's tremendous need for more action on the part of the Carter administration related to the concerns of blacks and those who live in a city.

Roger Wilkins 00:25:08.070
Well you know Roscoe, I've been watching Black leaders for a long time because I've known my Uncle Roy all my life. I've known Thurgood Marshall practically all my life. My mother was a leader in her own right. And all of those people plus others. Martin, Whitney, we're not just figures to me. They were either relatives or people whom I loved very much. So this, what I'm about to say it doesn't take one inch away from my respect for them and their accomplishments. But I would say to you that we probably have the most sophisticated layer of black leadership in this country now that we've ever had.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:25:58.390
Partly as a result of the activities of the 60s

Roger Wilkins 00:26:01.302
Partly that's right. The, that generation of leadership wiped away the crudest of the racial problems in America. I mean it's crazy to think about it now. But you and I couldn't go places. I don't know about you but I was born in a segregated hospital. I started my education in a one-room segregated schoolhouse in Kansas City, Missouri. My father is buried in a segregated cemetery there. From the perspective of 1978, that I remember, I know you served in a segregated unit.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:41.360
That's right.

Roger Wilkins 00:26:41.800
In World War Two

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:43.442
Segregated to fight for freedom.

Roger Wilkins 00:26:46.770
All that seemed so crude and stupid n 1978 but that was, those were the issues. In retrospect, they were much easier issues than the kinds of economic and urban issues that we're talking about now. But though they're not as famous. Vernon Jordan is famous. But though they're not as famous, people like Parren Mitchell who is Chairman now of the Congressional Black Caucus. Carl Holman who is the President of the National Urban Coalition. Marian Wright Edelman who is Head of the Children's Defense Fund and Eddie Williams who's Head of the Joint Center for Political Studies. Are really much more deeply involved in the intricacies of the American economy than that older generation of leaders was. They know more about how Congress works. They know more about how the federal agencies work. There's a layer of Black expertise in Washington that was never there before. The thing that the State of Black America piece that the Urban League put out last month, it's a very sophisticated thing, much more sophisticated than anything we'd see in the 60s.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:01.561
Than we've ever done. That's true. Well, what do you think is going to happen now as a result of this leadership? Because the people in the streets are saying they don't see a Martin. They do see a Jesse Jackson, but they don't see a Martin or Malcolm to exhort them to do the things that need to be done. Of course, what needs to be done is not sit-ins. What needs to be done is to get some people to lay some money on an economic investment in the black community, and in our cities.

Roger Wilkins 00:28:26.042
The leaders will get as much out of Congress as they can, much out of the president as they can. They will not exhort the masses. You know Martin did not lead the masses. The masses started, and then they found Martin, and Martin marched ahead of them. Well at some point the masses are gonna rise up again, they're gonna throw up new leaders and not this. These people I'm talking about aren't going to be the leaders. The masses will throw up their own leaders.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:28:50.850
I think that's a very insightful point. Of course, that's a point that really comes from one who has not only a legal background, but also a journalistic perspective. Because many of us are really saying, 'All right we're going to choose the leader.' And what you're saying is the leader will be chosen by the time and the events.

Roger Wilkins 00:29:06.061
Absolutely.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:29:07.081
Our guest on tonight "Soul of Reason" has been Roger Wilkins, Urban Affairs Columnist for The New York Times, and we've been talking about the impact of the Carter administration on the problems affecting the Black community and the necessity for more economic investment in the black community, and the role of our contemporary Black leaders in dealing with this particular need. This is Roscoe Brown saying so long for "Soul of Reason." This program is produced by the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University in association with NBC.

