Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.410
"Aminu Kano: African Revolutionary" is a new book by Dr. Alan Feinstein about this Nigerian hero and patriot. Hear Dr. Feinstein and U.N. Ambassador Ogbu of Nigeria discuss this exciting personality on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:38.680
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:07.090
With us on tonight's "Soul of Reason" are two distinguished gentleman, scholars, diplomats: Dr. Alan Feinstein, author of the new book "African Revolutionary: The Life and Times of Nigeria's Aminu Kano," and U.N. Ambassador Ogbu of Nigeria. Both of these gentlemen will be discussing this exciting book and this exciting personality on tonight's "Soul of Reason." Glad to have you gentlemen with us.

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:01:33.761
Thank you.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:35.051
Let's begin with Dr. Feinstein. Alan—if I can call you that—could you begin to tell us how you got into writing a book about Aminu Kano? How you got into getting the materials, got interested, and what obstacles, if any, you had to overcome in order to complete this very interesting book about a person that we really should know more about.

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:02:02.830
Well, I met Aminu when he was a member of the first Nigerian delegation to the United Nations back in 1960 when Nigeria gained its independence. We developed a fast friendship over the coming years, and it was in 1963 that I decided to take a trip with my family around the world, of which the trip included Africa and Nigeria—as a matter of fact, it ended with Nigeria—and I was very excited with the trip and became an Afrophile as a result, and subsequently spent a good deal of my extra-curricular time studying and researching material relating to Africa. It wasn't until a number of years later that I decided to try to put my research into more concrete form, in the form of a book about Aminu. I had, in the course of gathering this material, I had come to the conclusion that he was an exciting personality, that a good deal about his life could have some universal meaning to people of the United States, as well as Europe, and the rest of the world. So that, on the basis of this, I decided that I felt that I would try to put it into book form.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:52.121
Ambassador Ogbu, how has the book been received by people who are knowledgeable about these political and social developments in the life of Aminu? How has the book been received?

Ambassador Ogbu 00:04:07.330
I know, Dr. Brown, that people in Nigeria are excited about it because it's not quite often that books are written about people who are still alive.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:16.750.9999999999709
That's beautiful.

Ambassador Ogbu 00:04:18.261.0000000000291
Quite often books are written about people after they are dead, and Aminu is still playing a very important role within the government, and people like to read about his background, his previous thoughts, and his previous actions when he was not in government, in particular. This makes it quite exciting that they are able to compare, against his previous background, some of his utterances and performances now that he's in government.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:47.920
As a person who's read about a number of European and American political heroes, and a number of the earlier African liberationists, you know from Toussaint Louverture on up, I found this a very interesting—It's extremely well written, now—but I found it a very very interesting story, because, as a man who sort of took on two battles—one was the battle against what might be described as a kind of a feudal or more conservative intracultural system in northern Nigeria, and the other was the eternal battle that Africans have always waged against whoever their white rulers happened to be, and in this instance it was the British—and now, I was wondering, just how did he go about keeping this balance of remembering that he was born, I think is about 1920 that the British were just getting out, and that things were still very, very much controlled by the British, that the basic social, religious system which had been in vogue for literally centuries was very strong and actually had been strengthened by the way in which the imperialists have always used whatever inner divisions exist within a society to maintain their control. So how did Aminu go about approaching this dual struggle to bring about a certain equalitarianism in his own people, and at the same time throw off the yoke of the British rulers?

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:06:21.880
Well the British, as we know, used the system of indirect rule in their colonies and, in order to rule indirectly they had to strengthen the existing institutions, the existing governmental institutions. Subsequently, Aminu's role was essentially that of attacking the rulers—the feudal rulers—of Northern Nigeria, which was his bailiwick essentially in his early years. So that, essentially, he was attacking it by trying to introduce education and modernism to the country, and democracy. These goals were considered revolutionary at that time and in that place, so that the British came into conflict with a person like Aminu, although their stated aims were the very aims that Aminu was promulgating.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:30.492
By their stated aims, you mean the aims of the British of modernizing an democratizing education...

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:07:36.150
... education, et cetera. And he actually came into conflict with the British somewhat indirectly, although he was arrested on two or three different occasions for leading too militant a struggle for independence.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:54.310
Now what is—what would constitute, constitute too much militancy at that time?

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:08:01.011
Since the British were essentially engaged in trying to maintain their rule through the emirs, who are the local kings of northern Nigeria, Aminu, by attacking the emirs and the manner of their rule, was essentially attacking British rule at the same time.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:08:26.300
I noticed, Ambassador, you nodded your head in that way. Could you expand on that idea a little: how did the emirs really act out some of the British control at that time?

Ambassador Ogbu 00:08:39.500
Yes, actually I was nodding my head because my own impression is that Aminu fought the system from within the system. For example, Aminu did not, when he was offered a scholarship to study in England, refuse it because he did not like the British. Instead he took advantage of it and he went to England, but that did not stop him from going to Hyde Park to talk against British colonialism. And this is the type of person he was that, during these civilian days in Nigeria—when he was fighting the feudal system that had been translated into a political, supposedly democratic system that allowed for opposition—he was in no position, but then he even—I remember the case when he went to the Sardauna of Sokoto, who was the leader of the NPC party, to ask for money from him to buy a typewriter because he said "because I am too poor to afford a typewriter" and the Sardauna said to him, "Aminu, you want me to give you money to buy a typewriter to write against me?" And he said, " Yes, of course! Why not?" So that's the type of person he is, that he of course saw that the feudal system, the emirs, were tools of the British administration, and that he identified them with the British rule. And he criticized them. Nevertheless, he respected them because, according to tradition, he had to. But this is just the type of person Aminu is.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:16.481
Now this is interesting, and that's one reason why Aminu is such an exciting personality. Many of the revolutionary movements in Africa did deal with almost a total rejection of the system, and the symbols, and the education, and much more reliance on physical violence and even terrorism. Here we have a kind of political or sociopolitical model for revolution which, in a sense, probably left him without friends on both sides. I did read some of your very touching passages about how, even in this sociopolitical revolt he was going through, he did attempt to meet his own family responsibilities and accept within his own family whatever traditions were appropriate, you know at that particular time. And then, as we move into that very horrendous period of conflict between the west and the east, the north and the south— the so-called civil war—with the various cultural groups striving for power. How did he handle that? What was his approach? I read that with interest, but I still have some questions about exactly how he handled recognizing his understanding of the need for unification—the need for people working together—and, at the same time respecting the various cultural traditions that it had led to the roots of this basically political dispute. How did he handle that?

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:11:55.850
Well Aminu, as mentioned by the ambassador, was the leader of the opposition party in the north during the civilian days and, as such, he had found it expeditious to ally his party with the leading party of the eastern region at the time, which was led by Igbo people. Now, the Igbos were the core of the revolt at the time of Nigeria's civil war, so that Aminu found himself in a somewhat ambivalent position. At the time, there were some rather violent upheavals in the north as well as in other parts of the country, and Aminu unfortunately found himself with his hands tied. There was very little he could do to stem the kind of antagonisms which had grown up at the time. Although many Igbos who resided in the north had come to him as their friend, they were somewhat disappointed in the fact that he could do relatively little for and with them except perhaps to advise them to leave as quickly as they could for their own safety. Now, it's my estimate that this former alliance and friendship that Aminu had with Igbos carried over to a certain extent, although it remained dormant during the civil war period since he was active in Nigeria's cause at the time. And when, finally, the civil war was terminated, Aminu, I think, still has a core of good relationships with the Igbos and it is—Gowon's attempt is to reconcile all of the different forces within Nigeria and, to the extent that Aminu participates in the current military government, he is also attempting to regain the confidence of the Igbo people for himself as well as for the government itself.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:14:30.431
And those are very trying days for Nigeria and I guess still are in many senses. Ambassador Ogbu, how do you perceive Amino's role in being sort of a catalyst for getting people together in your country?

Ambassador Ogbu 00:14:48.320
I believe first that Aminu is a very nationalistic individual. He believes in Nigeria and he will go to any lengths to make sure and make his pronouncements if he thinks that they're in the interest of Nigeria. And he devotes his energies to this, and, to this effect, he has in fact criticised the present government of which he is a member, and I think this, is in itself, an element that a lot of people that admire in Aminu. I know that he, as a federal—rather than a state—minister goes 'round to all parts of the country because, his functions now, as a federal minister of health, take him to all parts of the country and he is able to establish personal and physical contact with the people around. And I'm sure that one of his strong points is his previous experience of having started very lowly, and his contribution based upon principles rather than individuals. So I think he will still be around and be very much in the reckoning of things should in case the present military government decides to hand over power to the civilians. I have a feeling that Aminu would want to be in the middle of it.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:16:19.160
Dr. Feinstein is the author of this very exciting book, with the title "African Revolutionary." Have you received any negative criticism from anyone who might perceive Aminu's role differently, or might have different views about the political situation in Nigeria? What has been the general reception—both the critical reception as a literary work and also the sociopolitical reception?

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:16:49.410
Well, as I state in my book, I attempted to step on as few toes as I could in the process knowing that Aminu is still alive and very much involved in the political life of his country. He would naturally have friends as well as rivals ,if you will. But Aminu's role has always been one of being militant politically on issues and he has scrupulously avoided attacking individuals. In the process of this, he has actually befriended many of his rivals and as cited in the incident by the ambassador, he has always maintained some kind of working relationship with his rivals politically so that he is in a position today where he can work with people who are formerly political rivals. Subsequently, I tried to handle this question in the book in such a way that he would. I would step on as few toes as possible.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:18:02.610
I noticed you are very skillful at that and, one particular aspect of that was where you were dealing with his sort of internal opposition to what might be called the ruling class or the elitist control of the federal government. I found that way in which you dealt with that very interesting, and I was wondering, Ambassador Ogbu, how effective can a man like Aminu be when he has an almost romantic attachment to the basic principles of democracy and freedom and interaction because that's what comes across. He is a person who truly believes in the interactional democratic process. How effective can he be in the world of politics—whether it's the world of politics in Nigeria or the world of politics of Watergate-ridden United States?

Ambassador Ogbu 00:19:00.573
Well Dr. Brown, I'm not a politician, but as somebody who observes from the sidelines, I think that Aminu will be able to—has been able to—operate the way he does because, in spite of the romanticism of his ideas about democracy and whatnot, he is not unaware of realities also. I think he chooses his—he calls his games very carefully, and he knows just where to push and how far to go, and to reconcile his theories with realities and the practical facts of life. And I think this is another very strong point in his favor.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:19:45.670
Dr. Feinstein, in selecting Aminu to write about—a true friend, and he's befriended you, you've befriended him, you've seen him in New York when he's been on assignment in the United Nations—did you have some larger purpose, in terms of looking at the way in which emerging nations and countries attempt to resolve their sociopolitical problems, or maybe even some lessons for us here at home, in terms of the type of mentality—the type of ethics—that should go into the political process? Were those some of the things that motivated you? Or was it just a—well it isn't "just"—but was it related to more or less of a personal respect and admiration for Aminu Kano?

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:20:35.971
No, I was very much impressed by Aminu, not so much as a friend—which he was—but by the manner in which he worked. The title of the book, starting with "African Revolutionary," was rather carefully thought out, and people's concepts of what a revolutionary is—very, of course, but—essentially, it's a rapid change of control from one class to another. Now Aminu, in that instance—in the times when he was politically active and when civilians were ruling Nigeria—was dealing with a feudal situation and his purpose was to change it to what we might call a bourgeois democracy. And...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:21:29.191
I like that choice in words: "bourgeois democracy," that detects of moxie in background...

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:21:34.202
Well, I use it carefully to distinguish perhaps between what we think of in terms of "revolutionary" when we're starting from the bourgeois democracy that I refer to, if we start from that point, of course a revolutionary is a different thing. Now, to a certain extent, he falls into that category but, as has been pointed out in the book and the Ambassador here has mentioned it too, he's a very much a realist. And I think we, here in the United States, could learn a great deal by that, in terms of our own revolutionary approach...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:14.340
Particularly our Black revolution that we're going through here.

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:22:16.521
Exactly. That, if a revolutionary on the American scene—or a militant, if you want to use the term—is anxious to produce results, he must never sever his contacts and his his relationships with the large masses of the people.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:22:35.940
Excellent, excellent. That really is the theme that comes through so beautifully and then, Ambassador, this relates to the emphasis that Aminu puts on education, and I know that your country, like many of the African nations, is placing more and more emphasis on education. I also know that countries such as Nigeria have had a great affinity and attachment to the British system, to British models, to British schools, etc. Yet, I have been reading that more and more of the African nations are now providing undergraduate education in their own countries. I know New York University has worked with the University of Lagos for many, many years in helping to train professors and so on, and some of our professors going and teaching in Lagos. And, I'm interested now in terms of what the impact of this increased access to education is on the political process. Obviously it has an impact on economic process, the technological process, but how do you perceive that the increased educational level and opportunities—particularly for college education right in Nigeria—has an impact or will have an impact on the sociopolitical process?

Ambassador Ogbu 00:23:53.990
I don't know whether you know, Dr. Brown, that I went to school in this college—in this country—I went to a small school in Daytona Beach, Bethune-Cookman...

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:24:05.620
Bethune-Cookman! Certainly.

Ambassador Ogbu 00:24:05.622
That's a good school! ... and then went on to Stanford University. But there is no doubt at all that, in Nigeria, the educational process is acknowledged to be the key: sort of an "open sesame" to political, and economic, and other aspects of life, and the real political life or consciousness in Nigeria can be traced back to early American graduates and people like Azikiwe and others who came back before perhaps Aminu finished elementary school. And it is quite significant that a number of them did enter politics, and tried to bring the forces of the British administration almost to a halt through the awareness that they used the news media and other things to make the people more conscious of their rights. And this was unlike what the British education is of those who are trained in Britain did when they came back, they fell right into the system. That's why I often said to Aminu, "I don't know what you would have done if you had been trained in America, if you had been educated in America." Perhaps they would have sped up the process of independence much faster. But those of us who have been trained in America—who have been educated in America—sometimes get completely embarrassed and frustrated with the attitude of the American or the administration in Washington of African problems, because we see America itself develop from the presence of colonialism and it was, you know, started by the thirteen colonial—thirteen colonies—and declared independence, and yet in the U.N. this time America is the only country that voted with Portugal and South Africa against the inscription of the question of Guinea Bissau. But on the other hand, I would like to make the point also that I have seen between the period when I was a student in this country and now as an ambassador of my country, and that there has been a tremendous change, especially where the Black is concerned through the process of education. And I hope that—and believe that—in the near future that this process—which, in itself, might be termed revolutionary or evolutionary—will increase and continue with a hope that the two countries can cooperate along many lines.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:26:38.680
That's a beautiful statement, which really bridges that wide ocean that separates Black America and America from Nigeria and some of the other African nations, and I think what you've just said—and what Dr. Feinstein has written about Aminu in the book—really is the message that probably should be disseminated more widely among thinking people—thinking Americans and thinking Nigerians, thinking Ghanaians, or what have you, about this whole process of bringing about a greater degree of equalitarianism in this society. In a sense—I don't know whether you thought about this, but—as I read the book, I was thinking of kind of a Nigerian Benjamin Franklin, in a sense—or, not so much Franklin, because Franklin had a little bit more of an elitist position—I was thinking possibly, maybe even more of a Nigerian Thomas Jefferson. So...

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:27:42.822
Actually, professor, I refer to him as Nigeria's Tom Paine, so that's perhaps closer.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:27:51.010
That's a beautiful point on which to close our discussion tonight. We've been talking with Dr. Alan Feinstein, author of "African Revolutionary: The Life and Times of Nigeria's Aminu Kano," and Ambassador Ogbu from the United Nations representing Nigeria. Thanks to both of you for being our guests on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Dr. Alan Feinstein 00:28:08.950
Thank you.

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:09.340
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the Black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

