Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:01.110
One million boys belong to over one thousand Boys Clubs throughout the nation. Of these one million boys, approximately 350,000 live in the inner city. What is the Boys Clubs of America doing to meet the needs of these 350,000 black, Puerto Rican, Chicano and Oriental youth? Here, Richard Jordan, director of National Urban Services of the Boys Clubs of America, discuss these questions on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:49.720
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the black thoughts. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:16.890
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" is Dick Jordan, director of National Urban Services at the Boys Clubs of America. And we're going to be talking about what the Boys Clubs of America is doing to try to meet the needs of inner city youth. Glad to have you with us tonight, Dick.

Richard Jordan 00:01:32.520
Glad to be with you, Dr. Brown. Looking forward to the opportunity of discussing with you.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:37.350
Well let's just talk about this idea of commitment of the National Boys Clubs of America to urban and minority youth. This is the largest organization, it serves primarily boys--does have some girls involved--but primarily boys. It has a long 75-year history and has supposedly been committed to dealing with poor youth and youth in inner cities. And now that the inner cities are primarily black and Hispanic, what really is the commitment of the Boys Club of America? Are they continuing its commitment, what's happening?

Richard Jordan 00:02:14.520
Well I think it's important to point out that because of this transition, as you talk about, that Boys Clubs of America traditionally has always delivered services primarily to poor communities. And usually the clientele of our membership was made up of new immigrants to the country in their early 20s. And this picture began to change after the Second World War to, as you pointed out, to non-white populations. What I think is interesting to point out is that our organization had its...I guess its largest growth rate during this period after Second World War up until 1970 or so. And our new units of operations have developed in the so-called 'core city' or metropolitan areas. This is contrary to some other organizations that deliver services to youth who have sort of moved to...the suburban areas of the country. We have over the last ten years concentrated much of our effort in improving the quality and quantity of services in the central cities. In other words, we have not abandoned the cities because of the change but have intensified our program and our resources in this area.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:34.391
Now so that the audience can be clear, how does the Boys Clubs of America differ from other youth-serving organizations like the YMCA and...let's say the Boy Scouts?

Richard Jordan 00:03:45.572
Well I guess there are a couple of basic differences. Both Boy Scouts and Boys Clubs are concerned about primarily boys and youth and...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:03:59.402
We'll talk about that a little later in light of Title IX and Affirmative Action but let's keep on going for now.

Richard Jordan 00:04:06.390
But basically the difference is that Boys Clubs are facility oriented. In other words we provide a facility which is consistently available to our consumers of service. Whereas in the case of the Boy Scouts, they utilize existing facilities and community schools, churches, boys clubs and other types of facilities in order to service their youngsters. We on the other hand develop a facility, and within that facility we design it to meet perceived needs of youngsters. And also, we emphasize paid professional staff to work with the youngsters. Although we use a lot of volunteers, either on our boards or in providing services to the kids, the prime responsibility of quality service rests with a professional. So we have a building and we have professional staff and it's available continuously to the youngsters.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:05:05.061
Now the Y, on the other hand, is a building which has provided living quarters and so on for young people--young men, in the case of the YM and young women in the case of YW--what do they do that's different or the same as what the Boys Clubs does, for example?

Richard Jordan 00:05:25.021
Both are facility oriented, as you point out; maybe one of the basic difference would be the cost of participation. Boys Clubs of America philosophically carries the notion of low membership dues to the extent that no youngster in a given community would be prevented from participating in a Boys Club program because of cost so the membership fee in the Boys Club is more traditional...than it is a fee to participate. They're very low. And where the case is even [if] that low fee creates a problem for a youngster, then arrangements are made so they can still participate. We have an open door policy generally because of this, and where the boys clubs are basically located in metropolitan areas, they tend to reach a different audience than your traditional YMCA.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:06:24.420
By located, you mean located in neighborhoods that have to be very crowded, have to be generally poor...and right now in most of our inner cities, practically all of them are apt to be black, Hispanic or Oriental.

Richard Jordan 00:06:36.371
Yeah. This is very true and I think it's important to point out that many of the areas where our Boys Clubs are located are suffering from the fact that most of the businesses have moved out to some extent...and has created an enormous problem for our locals and surviving, given the fact that their tax base--the tax base of the various communities--have reduced so severely in the last five to ten years especially since the '64 and '68 incidents we had in our major cities.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:07:10.740
It's interesting to point out that the Boys Club is basically supported by voluntary contributions, supported by United Ways and by independent fundraising campaigns throughout the country. Now with the advent of some federal monies from the law enforcement agency and some of the HEW agencies--the delinquency prevention agencies and so on--it's quite possible that Boys Clubs will be getting more federal funds and state funds.

Richard Jordan 00:07:40.920
This is a possibility but, as you well know Dr. Brown, the game plan on how categorical grants and revenue sharing will be handled is still somewhat up in the air. We are finding that our major cities are having some difficulty in determining how they're going to manage this process. Most of our metropolitan cities were not prepared to deal effectively with revenue sharing to the sense to where the federal government was dealing with it, with huge bureaucracies and huge resources and research and development people who would analyze programs and needs...this type of mechanism wasn't readily available in most cities. And so we're sort of working it out with city governments to determine how best we can develop this relationship.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:08:33.130
Now some people have been critical of the Boys Clubs--not only because it limits itself to boys, which we'll talk about again a little later--but also because they tend to be sport oriented, that so much of the activity in the club revolves around a gymnasium and the game room. And the question that some people have raised as to whether there aren't some other things that boys and young people need? Things in the creative arts, things in development of self-expression, things involving self-government, things going beyond the facility itself that, as one sociologist Dan Dotson says, "Many times the Boys Club is seen as a hothouse where the good kids in the neighborhood can come in, even if you don't have to pay they do have to be good to stay in, and the bad kids in the neighborhood stay outside and hassle the good kids who are inside." What about that criticism?

Richard Jordan 00:09:24.450
Well I think it's not valid, and I don't say this because I'm a product of a Boys Club and grew up in one...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:09:30.991
Is that right?

Richard Jordan 00:09:31.680
Yes.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:09:32.071
What Boys Club did you participate in?

Richard Jordan 00:09:33.366
Harlem Boys Club in New York City.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:09:35.351
It's a great club. They've had some great programs over the years.

Richard Jordan 00:09:38.911
And I think-- By the way--and this points out something I've noticed about the Boys Club--a number of the professionals in the club are people who themselves grew up in the club.

Richard Jordan 00:09:49.350
I think this is one of our strengths in that a large percentage of our professional staff--our national and in our locals--are products of the Boys Club itself.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:00.801
So you were one of the good kids that they let into HBC, and now you're gonna tell us how good the Boys Club is.

Richard Jordan 00:10:07.140
Well I don't know, if you check with the people on the block where I grew up, they might differ with you. They sort of questioned whether or not I'd survive till I was 12. But...no I don't think it's a valid criticism of boys clubs using competitive or athletic programs to the extent that that's all they do. I think what has been unfortunate is that many of the locals--Boys Club locals in the country and the national to a certain extent--have not taken a great deal of time to say to the public at large what we actually attempt to do--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:10:44.670
Okay, now tell us! This is your opportunity on WNBC radio, for Dick Jordan of the Boys Clubs of America to tell the audience what the Boys Clubs really do other than run basketball games and teach kids how to shoot pool.

Richard Jordan 00:10:59.441
Uh...yeah, we do that. Our approach is that we try to accept the notion that we are best at meeting kids where they are, rather than where we would like them to be. Not only physically but socially, sociologically. We approach using basketball and gymnasiums and these types of areas because we feel that a youngster has a right to enjoy living. Fun. We think fun...we used to say that term before: 'fun with a purpose,' and that's basically what it's all about. Athletic programs are what we call attraction programs...they're the dessert but they're not the entire meal. Youngsters come to us as you know voluntarily and we design activities which they find enjoyable. Now from that point, we hopefully train our staff to the extent that they use these activity components to build upon...to build upon in the areas of what we call skills of living, those things that the youngster needs...to survive in the present marketplace. And in most of your Boys Clubs you will find a myriad of varied programs dealing with the world of work, dealing with vocational training, dealing with remedial education, bilingual programs, arts and cultures...cultural programs are pushed a great deal in most of our clubs especially those operating in the inner city, because we have found that drama and drama workshops and art have been good mediums to help youngsters: one, understand the lifestyle of our country; two, begin to develop [communication] skills which are extremely important; developing self-esteem and confidence within themselves without necessarily being caught into the win-loss syndrome. So even though we have athletic programs and competitive programs, we do not feel that every program in a Boys Club should be competitive or that every...program in a Boys Club should just be purely physical. We emphasize a balance between education, recreation and cultural enrichment.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:13:24.770
The Boys Club, like many volunteer agencies have been seen and have served the purpose of socializing, taking people who had come from one type of culture--at one time basically European immigrants, now Spanish and black people from various parts of the country--and socializing them, getting them to be able to live and deal with the communities that they live in. On the other hand it has been suggested that this socialization also brings about a role acceptance: an acceptance of working hard because hard work is good, accepting your lot in life because that's what the grade masters set for you and that you're going to abide by the rules and you're not going to challenge the establishment. Now as we know coming out of the '60s and the '70s challenging the establishment is something that the young people have taken as a part of their lifestyle. It's something that minorities have taken as a part of their lifestyle because obviously their lot as minorities in this country has not been as was written in the Constitution. So how do you deal with that? Is there a tendency to, as I said, kick out the rebel, to deal with activities that tend to be more related to the establishment and to the old ways of doing things, or are you developing new things? That you have activities which service the community? Help families who need public assistance to get public assistance? To help young people who feel that the police and other agencies have been brutalizing them, taking advantage of them? Do you do any advocacy? What about that? Because I think this relates to how the club--the Boys Club--is a social agency, and other social agencies for that matter might be trying to meet the new demands that are being thrust upon them by the new type of people who live in our inner cities.

Richard Jordan 00:15:25.360
Well Dr. Brown that's not a loaded question, but it has about twelve parts to it. But let me take a shot at it. Let's start with the point of advocacy. This is a word that turns some people on and some people off, but I think we all recognize or should recognize the fact that voluntary agencies such as boys clubs have a mandate to deal in the role of advocacy. Part of our reason for being in existence is that we are to attempt to articulate to the broader public of the country the needs of our young. If we don't do this, then I think we're in violation not of a law but of the mandate and dignity in which the organization is supposed to respond to. In terms of young people wanting to participate in the marketplace, as I call it, and sometimes to do this in ways that are contrary to our past, this is an area which is difficult for any organization--difficult for boys clubs--but I think we have an advantage in that we recognize that it is part of the reason that we are in existence. And if we don't provide these opportunities for youngsters to test their mantle in terms of the society in which they're going to be a part of, then they have very little choice in living and very little chance to have a quality life. So we try very hard to help our professional staff and our lay body and the public at large to recognize the need for youngsters to test out and to...determine who they are and how they're going to perform in our society and why they should perform and what tools they will need to perform with at some point in time. This does lead to some confrontations between the ideas of the professional and the wants of the youngster. Here we hope that the types of training programs that we are now initiating across the country will help our adult staff recognize that there is not only needs in youngsters but there is also a great deal of knowledge. That our youngsters have been exposed over a short period of time to a tremendous amount of information more so than it was available to a youngster 30 years ago. I would dare say that a youngster who is now twelve has been exposed to, I'd say, twice as much information as I was exposed to when I was twelve.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:18:03.631
And probably twice as much brutality if you look at what happens on the tube.

Richard Jordan 00:18:07.540
Yeah well--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:18:07.892
Every night.

Richard Jordan 00:18:08.640
Yeah this is one of the things we try to do and we...put a great deal of emphasis on this--especially urban services--is trying to help our professionals and our local affiliates [to] monitor the reality, recognize the fact that a youngster, that an individual who is 21 years old at this point in time, if you were to look back over his history on earth, in this country, he has seen very little that points to dialogue as being a part of decision making. He's seen wars. He's seen riots. He's seen people being assassinated, and he generally sees that when a decision has to be made it is made by the loudest voice rather than the most intelligent approach to a problem. Seeing this constantly for 20 years, it's not surprising that this individual might have some different ways of approaching our social system than we had, and trying to help our adults and lay body and the youngsters understand this problem...it's difficult, but we feel because we recognize that it is a problem we have a better chance of dealing with it.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:19:22.590
Okay. Well speaking of that, I believe that the national organization reflected its commitment to the urban situation by taking a grant of some five hundred thousand dollars it received from the Lily Foundation to create what's known as the Urban Fellows Training Program, which deals specifically with the point that you just made about helping to prepare the adult professionals to deal with the type of situations and problems that they face in the urban community. So could you tell us a little something about the Urban Fellows Training Program? Who's running it? What's it doing, and what is happening as a result of it?

Richard Jordan 00:20:03.220
Be glad to, Dr. Brown. The program is approximately a year to a year and a half old. The Lily Foundation in the Midwest chose Boys Clubs of America--after some dialogue between our staff and the foundation--to give us half a million dollars to deal in the area of training and dealing with the needs of helping our local affiliates to respond better to the needs of the communities. Out of this, over a year period of time, we developed what we call now the Urban Fellows Training Program ,which is presently under the direction of Clarence Bo Hunter, a very competent professional that we were privileged to be able to attract to the boys club movement, and under his direction...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:20:57.980
And I believe Bo is a former Boys Club member, too.

Richard Jordan 00:21:00.520
Yes, he was a Boys Club member in Jamestown, New York, and he's been in the Boys Club movement all the way through his undergraduate and graduate work. He's worked at a number of Boys Clubs...throughout the country. Which he brings to the project the wealth of experience in his young age and that he's worked in West Coast, Midwest, middle-Atlantic, New York, small clubs, large clubs...and this type of knowledge base, bringing into a program such as this has done much to add to the effectiveness of the model. The program basically is directed at our larger organizations who are operating in inner cities metropolitan areas of the country. I say inner cities because we use the term 'inner city' and 'central city' and 'urban' interchangeably. But we're talking about areas of the country where we have a high density population, low economic level in terms of a large portion of the population, high minority count in terms of population makeup, and usually unfortunately a high crime rate and a high dropout rate in terms of the public schools and so forth. And those clubs who are located in these types of areas we have chosen to work with over a three year period of time to bring together a triad as we call it: between the board, the laymen the people who develop the dollars for the organization, the executive who orchestrates the operation, and the direct service personnel and these are the professionals who are--what we say are 'on the line,' who work with the youngsters daily and to bring them together into a team, and then adding to this team of course the consumer, the youngsters themselves and the community. And from that base, to move into developing programs and resources to meet the needs of the youngsters.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:23:06.250
All right...specifically how many clubs are involved in this program? At the present time the program is designed to service 88 organizations.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:23:16.660
Those are 88 Boys Clubs in these heavily concentrated metropolitan areas.

Richard Jordan 00:23:21.490
Yes, I say organizations because...they probably represent close to 210 Boys Clubs. But like the Chicago Boys Clubs--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:23:31.780
Have several branches...

Richard Jordan 00:23:31.991
Has 16 units, Children's Aid Society and city of New York...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:23:35.081
And these might involve as many as 300,000 or thereabouts...young men.

Richard Jordan 00:23:40.270
Yes, very easily.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:23:41.651
And in doing this, what are some of the things you're focusing on? What are some of the kinds of skills you're trying to develop?

Richard Jordan 00:23:48.670
Well we're trying to develop skills and perceptiveness. One: role clarification, that the staff and the board begin to understand their various roles in terms of determining how the Boys Club is to operate and service the community. To help staff understand the needs and interests of youngsters. Given our new marketplace, the urbanization process and that impact that is placed upon youngsters and what types of problems these youngsters are now facing that...were not, you know, that prevalent 20 years ago.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:24:24.430
Now beyond this human relations understanding component, is there anything in terms of management or program development that you can sign with?

Richard Jordan 00:24:31.270
Yeah well our floor moves from the people stance: it's understanding oneself and understanding the value of other people and having a respect for that. And then we move into what we call...hard material such as management. A Boys Club has to be operated with efficiency especially in the present time where dollars are extremely tight. How do you get maximum use of the dollar? How do you get...so planning becomes a very important part. And so we've pushed very hard and through this program to move our organizations into a corporate stance, in terms of looking at the...

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:25:09.311
Big business comes to the boys clubs! MBO, management by objectives...

Richard Jordan 00:25:12.651
--but not to the demise of people. I think what we're very proud of in the Urban Fellows Program is that we constantly point out to everyone involved that systems do not replace people. And it is not...a way to do a job is to help. If it doesn't help improve the quality of life of the consumer, then junk the system.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:25:36.160
Well let's talk about that consumer. And we talked about people, and yet we've been talking about boys...now, what is the stance of the Boys Clubs of America vis à vis girls, particularly in 1974 where girls are certainly as much a part of this urban community as our boys?

Richard Jordan 00:25:52.600
Roscoe...I say Roscoe now, rather than Dr. Brown--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:25:55.931
Now we're gonna get down to the real nitty,

Richard Jordan 00:25:55.940
okay...[laughter] And being an alumnus of NYU also...we have traditionally serviced girls. That's the first thing, to clear the air.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:26:11.230
It's like for segregation, it's that "We've always helped you people to get ahead." [laughter]

Richard Jordan 00:26:14.841
[laughter] No, the philosophy of the organization and our goals state that--roughly--that we try to...a part of our mission is to help young men become productive citizens in a pluralistic society. We recognize that you cannot do this unless you deal with the environment in which the youngster or young man must participate in. In that society, obviously, there are women. In fact there are more women--

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:26:45.190
Thank God!

Richard Jordan 00:26:45.193
...in that society--than there are men. So we recognize the role--not 'a' role--but the need for boys clubs to speak to the issue of girls.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:26:58.041
Now, isn't it true that some clubs now are taking girls as auxiliary and co-members?

Richard Jordan 00:27:02.030
Oh yes, that's correct. As auxiliary members, associate members, there are certain projects in a particular Boys Club that would be coeducational. What we try to do is to match where in the time of the youngster's growth that this type of unisex delivery is important to him.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:22.520
And of course I think, just as Little League has gone to Congress to get their charter changed to include girls, certainly Boys Clubs of America will have to eventually do somewhat similar type of thing in order to meet this objective of helping boys to relate to the real world.

Richard Jordan 00:27:37.100
If we do, it will not be because we are being pressured by the society to do this. But if we do it will because it will be in the best interests of the young people of the country.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:27:47.810
And I think that's a good way to close the program, because basically what the Boys Clubs is about is trying to help all people in society, in particular dealing with those youth in the inner city community. I'd like to thank Dick Jordan National Director of Urban Services of the Boys Clubs of America for being our guest on tonight's" Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Outro 00:28:05.420
You've been listening to "Soul of Reason" with your host, the Director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

