Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:00:01.290
Black writers actors and actresses are lighting up Broadway with excitement, talent, and commitment. Hear Loretta Green and Glynn Turman, stars of "What the Wine-Sellers Buy," discuss this explosion on tonight's "Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:34.231
This is "Soul of Reason," a program that will examine the roots of the Black thought. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University, and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Junior, director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:01:00.901
With us tonight on "Soul of Reason" are Loretta Green and Glynn Turman, stars of "What the Wine-Sellers Buy," which is now at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center. And "What the Wine-Sellers Buy" is a play that has been acclaimed widely by critics, by Ron Milner. It has been at the New Federal Theater and now it is at Lincoln Center. It's a classic story of the interaction between good and evil and Loretta and Glynn playing in this in the principal roles. Glynn attempting to attract Loretta, his high school girlfriend, into prostitution -- and all of the evils that surround it -- with Rico, played by Dick Williams, a pimp, trying to seduce him to seduce his girl into this. Now, behind this relatively simplistic morality play, which is a classic story throughout history, what else is "What the Wine-Sellers Buy" trying to say to the audience -- to the Black audience, to the white audience. That's a toughie [crosstalk] because whenever you have a play that has so much excitement -- and this play has a lot of excitement on stage -- then when you, you pause -- and I noticed that in the play a couple of times -- in your role you said something and pau-- it was just like a striking silence. What happens next? And then you move into another scene, and that really is what happens when you get into some of this new Black drama, because we are really looking behind all the simplicities of our experience into some of the complexities of it.

Loretta Green 00:02:37.660
Well, first of all, I don't totally agree with them, that it's a conflict between good and evil.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:02:44.450
Okay, that's a good start.

Loretta Green 00:02:45.751
I don't see Rico as evil. Many of the things that Rico says are very valid, very true, very real. He is usually a very intelligent type of man who has been unable or just didn't make the right choices in which to pursue his talents. And if we use them the best way that he knew which was from the streets. A lot of the controversy over the play has been that it's a simple kind of story, and it's, you know, good against evil morality-type play -- which, kind of, you know, really gets to me because it's not true. You know, you could take any play, and if you tell the plot outline, make it sound very simple.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:35.320
That was the [crosstalk] basic plots in the theater are really

Loretta Green 00:03:39.490
anything

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:03:40.060
simplistic plots and it's what's behind [crosstalk] them that's really the basis of the question. What's behind what appears to be a relatively simplistic plot, because you can write down 10 plots and probably you've got most of the plays that are ever written.

Loretta Green 00:03:51.132
Exactly, and you can do that to Eugene O'Neill. You can do it to anybody, you know, but that's what is bothering me about it. But, aside from that, I would just say that it's a matter of choices, of choices that are presented to you in the process of growing up, and the choices that you are allowed to make, about how you want to live your life, how you want to be looked at, and how you want to be as a human being.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:04:18.40.000000000029104
Well that is that really is what comes across, and even though it is simplistic to say it's good and evil, the fact that you have choices, choice of a certain magnitude, and in the play it's the mother, Glynn's mother in the play who, her boyfriend helps to focus on what these choices are. And I think for the Black community it's so significant. Now, you playing a young, Black -- young man, really -- in high school going through all the things -- the basketball, the school, the girls, the dope ,the wine -- have to respond to this. Now you, Glynn Turman, responded beautifully on stage, as the portrayal of the role. What are some of your insights that you as a person bring to this play? How do you perceive this conflict, as it were, even though it's a simplified conflict?

Glynn Turman 00:05:20.470
Well, again going back to the overstated simplicity of the play, the character is a complex character because you've got 17 years of a young man's life wound up in three hours. You have to sort of find out what led him to this particular point in his life. As an actor I have to find out all I can about that, all I can about myself, that has put me in these particular situations of weaknesses and strengths, both of which are part of this character's makeup, as all peoples' makeup. And in the process of doing this, you know, I find out who Steve Carlton is, and why he is as he is, you know, to me. Again, that is not a simple process, just like the play is not a simple play. Yet it is -- you know, as simple as life is -- [laughs] You know what I mean?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:06:22.681
Of course we all know life ain't simple! [crosstalk]

Glynn Turman 00:06:24.111
It's simple, but it's simple with its complications. [laughter] You know what I mean. Everything. The choices are always simple. You do it or you don't. You know what I mean? All you have to do is say "no," all you have to do is say "yes." You know, somebody offers you some poison, all you have to do is say "no, I don't want it." It's just that simple. Now, you can make a complicated by saying "Yeah, and I'll think about it, " you know what I mean, "because I don't feel good, and maybe this'll make me feel better." You know, that's complicating things. You know what I mean? So that all of these complications are offered into the play, too, and they're offered from a very valid point of view, because they do exist. You know what I mean?

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:07:08.623
That's one thing that I felt: it was almost as I though was walking down the streets of one of our inner cities, and some of the brothers and sisters they, I could identify with because I've seen them -- I've known them, I've talked with them, I've tried to help them, I've worked with them -- and this really comes across very nicely in the play. However, as you then begin to see Rico, the pimp, with his fancy clothes and his fast talk, you begin to -- at least I began to ask myself the question: what are we really trying to say to Black youth? It's true that life is complex and that there are decisions to be made all of the time, and even though it's not necessarily good and evil in that type of sense, certain types of decisions tend to be more fruitful than others. For example, if one decides to become a junkie, decides to become a pusher, that begins to develop certain patterns which, probably -- even though there might be some short term pleasure -- it would not end up too positively in the long term. And I think many of the players that have dealt with drugs in the Black community have pointed this up. And when you mentioned poison, immediately I was thinking of heroin, because it's a it's a long term poison a short term pleasure, as it were. So how, again, was the play trying to address itself to the Black community -- and I would assume, and maybe you can correct me on this, that essentially the play was addressing itself to the Black community. Is is that a reasonable assumption? Not that "no, the white community can't respond to it," but essentially, my interpretation is that it was addressing itself to the Black community. Is that a correct interpretation?

Loretta Green 00:08:47.970
Yeah, it's correct. When you asked the question "What, what are they to walk away with?" It's very difficult to tell young people today any kind of moralistic values, give them any kind of moralistic values, when they can, they're very sophisticated, very bright today, much more so than I was when I was growing up. And they can look around them and point to all the contradictions that this country is built up on. And they can say "well, you know, the man who runs such and such an organization is a criminal, too, in my eyes," and they can justify it very well. So you can say, it's very difficult for them -- to tell them -- "don't follow Rico's way," just by that. So what, what to me the play is saying, is to think of the values that Rico has set up for himself, and this you can tell people because these are very real. And the, and the most real one to a Black man is, is the Black woman, you know, and the first one in the beginning steps is, you know, respect your woman, you know, and don't, don't use her as a barter to buy you materialistic pleasure -- like you say, short time pleasure -- car, flashy clothes, and such -- because, you know, what the title says, what II've often wondered what it is the wine-sellers buy, one half so precious as what they sell, and what they sell being a woman in this case. And, as far as dealing with, with the dope question, it's, it's building that foundation in someone so that it's not just dope, which is the poison of the day, but who's to say 20 years from now with the poison of tomorrow will be. And we, what we have to do is bring our children to the point where they can reject any kind of poison that is detrimental to them, yeah. And that's -- that's what I -- that's what I love about the play, because it's building the inner thing.

Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. 00:10:36.851
In a sense [crosstalk] that's a role theater has played, but Black theater plays this more explicitly, trying to help the Black community -- Black men, Black women, Black youth -- to examine their values because we are in a society where it's very difficult to completely see through values. Now Glynn, as you develop this role of Steve and this whole idea of respect for the Black woman -- you know that's a theme that is emerging more and more in Black writing and in Black drama -- how, in particular, did Steve finally work out his value systems in relationship to Black women?

Glynn Turman 00:11:19.130
Well, I think where he had to go was someplace deeper than even that. I think he had to go to -- he had to start at that common denominator, I like to call it. He had to start at his own human values. He had to go to himself as a human being. He had to deal with all the things that moved him as, as a human -- that moves his mother as a human, that moved everybody around him as a human. I think he had to start there. That's why I, for some reason can't -- although I know that I've heard that the play is, is geared for, for Black audiences -- it was written for Black audiences, so on and so forth -- yet the human, the impact that the play leaves on all the audiences that have come -- which have been mixed -- everyone has come back and has something very positive, very internal to say about the play, which means that it hit everyone. Which means that it goes beyond a skin line and goes into the common denominator of the human line, which is a far more broader spec-- spectrum and therefore, I think that that's that must be the key of the whole thing in which Ron Milner has hit, rather he did it intentionally or not, because in its simplicities and in its, all of its, all of the poetry that's written in the play, the confusions all of the, the confrontations, are all dealing with what a human being is. And one has to have self-respect, respect for himself, and he can then deal with others respectfully. You know what I mean? Anybody...Well that's again [crosstalk] the role of the arts to... That's the role of the role of the arts... explore what people are about in a society. And speaking of the arts, there are so many talented actors and actresses in "What the Wine-Sellers Buy," when I read the playbill, I just read all the credits of these various folk, I thought this is one of the most talented task -- casts that had been assembled, and it raises two questions. One is: do all of, all of this great talent come to one play because the play demanded it, or because there are few opportunities for Black actors and actresses? And I thought I'd open up now the whole question of are opportunities for Black actors and actresses of all ages beginning to open up? Or are we still fighting a, a struggle to be recognized as a significant part of the world of the arts, in this instance particularly the world of the theater? Well, when you speak of the world of the arts and the world of the theater I would still say there is a tremendous need for more vehicles for Black actors and actresses. If you'd wanna follow the Hollywood route, this [unintelligible] -- they're taking a lot of film like five comes out of Hollywood once every five years. [crosstalk] Once every thirty-five years... [crosstalk] The basic -- Well now [unintelligble] speeding up a little bit -- but the basic, you know, stuff that they're sending out still is not, for me, a viable vehicle, as what I consider myself to be an artist, more than an entertainer or a performer. The question that you spoke of earlier about bringing all this talent into one play because we have, like, Dick Williams -- who is a monster, monster, monster actor and, his wife Gloria Edwards, who is, you know a monster actress, and -- I mean I could name Marilyn Coleman, Sonny Jim, you know, you know, the cast is like who's who in Black theater. But it's because, too, one of the reasons the play is one of those kind of plays that an actor would want [crosstalk] to be in, you know. And it's, it's a beautiful experience working with these people. But I would say -- well, what we need, now, is we have Black playwrights. You know, we have Black directors and we have -- God knows, we have [unintelligible] a lot of Black actors and actresses. We need some control into Black theater. We need people, we need producers. We need producers. And of course that begins to get into money, which is one of the problems that... Right. ...the Black community faces in almost any type of economic venture. And in terms of the arts -- because mounting a play is a very, very expensive proposition, and with the exception of very few publicly supported plays -- and even those have private input into them -- it does require sort of an increased enlightenment and commitment on the part of those Black people who can afford to invest, to invest in plays. I'd like to say this thing was one thing Woody King who produced the play written me down Henry Street and L.A. production of it. It is the associate producer who was on this production is to my knowledge the only really credible black producer that has a long lag behind him in New York what he has bought so many Black plays to the public eye and what he was trying to raise money for wine sellers. A lot of black investors were contacted but black people seem very reluctant to invest money in this kind of venture. You know I can understand but when you don't have that much. But you know there are other things that you know we do invest in that may not be quite as good ludicrous. You know later on but I just want to say was if the investors were not so hard to come by the producers would not have such a hard time and the black people that they would now but just taken it. You know it takes a great deal of money to put on a production either put on a play or to do a film or and to get up off that money. You know when blacks have had such a high way to go to get that particular piece of money you know just don't you know because people really still look at the arts as a very flimsy very flimsy way of life very flimsy existence and there is you know nothing seems concrete. And it really isn't. Other than the fact that it's art you know which is has its own bases of concrete in this but uh. So that is very hard and understandable to you expect black people to say no I can't be throwing my money into that. You know what we are talking about into a play was you know what is that. You know it usually takes two or three hundred thousand dollars or illegally off you know around a very very minimum. Well depending on the production that we're talking about on the other hand to be there. But the thing is that it has to be done. That's the point. We have to we have to get to that place where we are not afraid to go ahead and do things just do it and do it big. You know I did the production of A Raisin in the sun when I was much younger. The original production and the when the lines are stuck with me when I was that age was a thing that Walter Lee was played by Sidney Poitier then says invest big gamble big he'll lose big if you have to right you know and it stuck with me. That's it. That makes a lot of sense. Possibly we could get a thousand black people of let's say 100 black people to put up you know a thousand hours each. We've got to start. And that certainly is within reason. I'm sure that there are many more people than that who could put up that kind of money. And it does reflect and this is one of the things we do on soul of reason is to reflect on this state of black society black politics black arts and Virginia capers who was in the musical version of raisin was saying this very same thing. She's been in this theater for some 20 some odd years and this is the first time she was really able to get to Broadway in a starring role. And she was saying that what we need is more of this energy of black people innocent and economic energy being directed toward the theater toward supporting the theater and the arts. That's another thing. I think we have to begin to start thinking of alternatives because the old theater way is dying as the institution of theater as we know the plays and that is going on Broadway revival in musicals you know we have to start thinking of are we going to go down there we'll die with them or are we going to build our alternatives. You know are we going to make our stand so strong you know that we have to they have to. It's that I think that's what we have to really begin when we talk about black theater. We talk about the form. You know we're getting into an artificial type form though are we talking about redefining what black theater is. You know the same forms the same people the same. But redefining our criteria for basing you know what it's about and that we cannot let Ken black white. Critics kill play like one sell. That's true. On the other hand we have this community theater movement which is very vibrant in a number of black communities but unfortunately in many communities there is so small that we don't get the breadth of audience. Now you have that old dilemma. Do you develop your art and develop it very very well in a small audience. Or because you're trying to say so much to the world and to the black community. Do you try to get those larger avenues now when you get those larger avenues you get into unions and you get into running halls and you get into paying those bills each week. And that's the dilemma. And that's really the thing that we need to talk about. I think where you have to start again you have to start at the beginning. You know it's very difficult to build anything Stein with a weak foundation you have to have a foundation that is right out you know before you do anything. And the foundation starts with the youth. You know the thing you have to do and the thing that the role that the community theater plays a great deal of importance in is the fact that it introduces theater to the young people. And I think that's all are all we can hope for now is to turn on the young people to what theater is what it's about. What is differences between the theater in the movies and television. You understand what this is all about. What what does theater mean. What role does theater play. What do you see in the theater. What elements does it take to make up theater. And once you then build a theater owners you mean we've got to face it. We haven't had a theater going audience as black people for you know more than what 10 years. Lately you know what I mean because you have the Lafayette theater. Yeah I had a line and we had a we had been there before. Yeah we tried to regenerate. It's in a sense it's a revival. I agree that in the last 20 years or so five years we haven't but back in the 20s there was a considerable commitment in the black community and of course you know the Lafayette theater in Harlem which unfortunately died and what we have to do now. And I think this is what you folks talking about and I think it's beautiful that you're focusing on the youth because the youth of course are the vibrancy of any group and particularly in the arts because they're not hamstrung by these various things and the type of thing that you do in your plays and in your films that reach youth are very important. Before we come too close to the close of the show I'd like to talk a little about your own training and experience particularly some of the experiences that both of you had at the High School of Performing Arts in New York because both of you are from there. Anna Horsford body BANFIELD A number of others who have been with your group have been there. And whereas obviously one school doesn't make you the fact that so many black youth were attracted and now attracted increasing numbers to the arts mean something so could you talk a little something about your own experiences your own views of specialized training schools like performing arts ways young people can get into theater both then when you started and now. Well again it's good that the community theater is a real community theater opened its arms to young people to come be a part of it in some form or fashion. Like you said both the red and I went to the High School Performing Arts which at that time had very very few black students attend it although it is a small school in the first place but where I went to junior high school I hadn't even heard of the high school performing arts. It was. It's the kind of school which if nothing else can introduces you to what theater is about what what techniques are about what acting is about to a certain degree and tries to give you a foundation of what that's about. The atmosphere is such that it really puts you even his location the fact that is located right and 46 street and on Broadway puts you smack dab in the middle of the muck. I was really before you. You are you have you can't help but rub shoulders with it and if you come out of that school at the end of the three years or four and still want to be in theater well then you have some idea of what you're in for and therefore you used what you've learned at a very young age that this is either for you or not for you it does that much for the high school performing arts as well as give you a good take you know good background asked and some of those introducing you into acting I do you know I learned a lot from performing arts and I'm glad I went. Now Loretta about community theater what are some of the opportunities for young people in community theater how do they get into it how do they develop their techniques you know I have to name places per say but just the idea of what community theater does because I think Glenn ran out very beautifully the school help them to identify with the arts with the theater know as you say what the muck is and develop some technique now Community Theater is sort of self energized and many times self supported. And yet we find that still it requires techniques and a higher high degree of skill to be able to move ahead to project what you want. So tell us a little about community theater opportunities for young people and how they can get into it and what they can get. My experience for community theaters in New York is not one of the most positive experiences. One of the reasons for that is that community community theater in New York I don't think is from my experiences in other cities. The same feeling of community that does exist in other cities community in New York is so fragmented and you know so polarized here so and so we not here so and so and they're all competing with each other if they're trying to make a way for each other build each other and learn from each other. Tell me in L.A. one little community group will Google but the other community group I need to buy it is. Oh yeah. I need to borrow this set you know can I buy. They do that with each other. You know part of the reason the competition isn't as different as many. But the thing is where I think we need. Just like we need that unity in community theater has to me never really been a vehicle for the actor so much as for the playwright. They they use a lot of new playwrights and playwrights get a chance to show their works. But the actors are very quick ish kind of thing and I would say to a young person trying to get involved with the community theater to keep in mind there are many community theaters are evolved around a click type of thing and develop you to one point. That's what I am still if I'm the old school and still in favor of going to some kind of an acting school and getting some kind of basic technical training you know on top of that. I think that's a very good summary and integration of some of the things we've been talking about tonight namely that blacks are turning to the theater that the theater does have a tremendous amount to say to black people and that young people who are interested should look for every avenue possible to explore and develop their talent and go do it not only to it but to do it. That's the thing. Go do it. Thanks Glenn. Glen Turman and Loretta Green from what the wine sellers by our guest on tonight soul of reason. You've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Art for one hour on affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience. Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

