Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:00:01.820
What are the opportunities for Black youth to receive higher education in today's world? Here, Dr. Steven Wright of the College Entrance Examination Board discuss these issues on tonight's" Soul of Reason."

Radio Bumper Intro 00:00:34.161
This is "Soul of Reason" a program that will examine the roots of the Black thoughts. "Soul of Reason" is produced by the WNBC Community Affairs Department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University and will be presented each week at this time. Here now is your host Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., director of the Institute of Afro-American Affairs at New York University.

Dr. Roscoe Brown Jr. 00:01:00.920
With us this evening is Dr. Steven Wright, who is vice president of the College Entrance Examination Board which is the agency which is responsible for administering the S.A.T.s, the college entrance test. And Dr. Wright is also renowned as an educator. Having been president of several institutions and we'll talk about his efforts in black education with black colleges as well as about the college entrance exam board. Steve glad to have you with us this evening.

Dr. Steven Wright 00:01:29.600
Glad to be here Roscoe.

00:01:31.221
Well I want to ask you the question that everybody asks every official from a college entrance examination board what's happening to the college board scores we see in the New York Times that the college board scores the averages have gone down over the past six or seven years. Is the test tougher are the kids dumber. Or is it that they don't care.

Speaker 4 00:01:51.240
Well Roscoe the real answer to the question is nobody knows. And the decline has been going on for a period of twelve years not merely five or six. And they are they've gone down enough I think to be considered serious. The good many theories about the reasons for the decline but nobody as I said really knows the answer. Give me one of those theories or one of them is that television has cut into the time that the youngsters used to devote to reading which has affected the verbal score on the S.A.T. the mathematics decline hasn't been as severe as the verbal decline. But one of the theories about that is that the amount of emphasis on mathematics since the Sputnik time has decreased over those years. One of the things I think I ought to say that is not the cause of it and that is the influx of black and minority students and one of the evidences of that is the fact that the number of students the actual number or percentage of students scoring 700 and above in on those tests has decreased over the same period. But as I say we are looking into it. We are studying it. We hope to come up with some answers.

Speaker 5 00:03:21.790
Well from a very practical point I think you're going to have to because many institutions are now looking at alternate methods of selecting young people for entrance into college but they need not Roscoe. All I know.

Speaker 6 00:03:34.470
Is not that I'm not but for a very good reason.

Speaker 4 00:03:38.060
Nothing has happened to the predictive validity of the examinations. The The The The predictive coefficients are just as high as they ever were. In other words they still tell substantially how well the student is going to do in a freshman year in a college.

Speaker 5 00:03:55.880
That's certainly true. Historically if we look at the purpose of the college entrance examinations it was to eliminate favoritism and getting into some of the better colleges. That's correct. Rich people's kids would get in and cetera to get the more talented it is now being alleged particularly with minority students at the test have a built in cultural bias based on the fact that minority students reek we do not have the educational opportunities and associate experiences of majority group students. And if the college board scores are used as the sole or the main determinant of entrance into college you really wouldn't have many minority students in your very very best colleges so much so that some of the colleges have instituted special programs or as I suggested earlier alternative assessment procedures for determination as to who gets into college. And I know I believe that there's some research going on right at the College Board on this.

Speaker 6 00:04:49.070
Oh yes there's a good deal of research going on about the cultural fairness of other tests and it's a fact that blacks and some other minorities do score lower on the average than the majority of the students do.

Speaker 7 00:05:06.470
But at the same time the research at this point indicates that they these tests do predict for blacks but the scores are lower and we are very much aware of this. But the admission to college is still an and and. A responsibility of an individual institution if it wants to admit the black students. It certainly can and we caution all institutions not to employ our college board scores as the sole criterion the the average score that a student makes out of his high school record is still a splendid predictor in in the mass.

Speaker 5 00:05:48.540
Well is there a somewhat of a tendency for more institutions to use methods other than the college boards in terms of selecting their freshmen. We added about four years ago an instrument to the S.A.T. called Student descriptive questionnaire.

Speaker 7 00:06:05.850
It gives an admissions officer a great deal more information about students than usually institutions gathered on their own their own. A number of institutions are paying a good deal of attention to this because it contains information that helps them to assess the potential of students. And the answer to that is yes.

Speaker 5 00:06:26.280
Well what about the utility oh the need even for college entrance whether it's the S.A.T. or they s.t. American College Testing Program ACG which is another one. What about the need for these as we have more and more youngsters going to public institutions with open enrollment policies. And anyone who graduate from high school is guaranteed admission to some public institution. Does that begin to obviate the need for a examination to select who's going to go into college.

Speaker 7 00:07:00.150
I think to the extent that there are genuine open admissions situations that would be true. New York City for example does not employ S.A.T. examinations but it is fairly rare among the large public institutional systems in this country in so far as open admissions is concerned getting into one of the undergraduate institutions and many of the states is a tough job and still is getting into the the colleges that constitute the Sunni system. The New York state system is a fairly tough job also.

Speaker 5 00:07:39.270
Well this raises a question which I'm sure you and a college president have had to deal with and that is to what extent should colleges be typed to what extent should one college say we take the superior superior student in another college says we take just the technically oriented student who's superior another one says we take only the artistically oriented student was superior given the fact that many of these criteria for determining how good someone is at the end of high school kind of weak including high school grades. How do we really justify stratified youngsters in terms of which colleges are the quote unquote most selective.

Speaker 7 00:08:20.010
I'm going to ask you tangentially Roscoe. First of all I'm speaking for myself and not the college board as far as I'm concerned all public institutions at the undergraduate level ought to be open admissions institutions. I think that's the answer to it and I am not concerned about how high the standards of the great private institutions might be. Harvard the in my use where you work ought to be privileged to set their scores and the admissions criteria pretty much where they wish them to to be. I think they have an up. They have an obligation to be fair about it. And systematic about it and even handed about it. But where public institutions are concerned I'd like to see them open admissions institutions.

Speaker 5 00:09:07.710
Well I would concur with your position on public institutions. I would somewhat challenge your position on private institutions and in private institutions should not be a bastion of escape for the elite a segment of society they should not be a place which becomes all of one ethnic group or all of one's sex or what have you.

Speaker 1 00:09:25.240
I would recommend and careful not important to say that that they should be limited to a racial group one ethnic group. That's what I mean by I agree with that. But they're going back to their earlier statement. If you do recognize that there are differences and they are between various racial groups particularly blacks on the College Board and you allow our institution or encourage institution to take only the highest then this de facto eliminates a certain proportion of blacks and other minorities. And I would maintain that even the private institutions have a responsibility to open their spectrum in terms of the way in which they select maybe a certain number of them might be selected on the basis of superior superior test scores. But there are other things even for people from majority groups that for sage success we know that it isn't the students who made most of the inventions in our society it's the B students the ones who are not really necessarily positive that Roscoe.

Speaker 6 00:10:30.690
But I think that and institutions purposes ought to be respected.

Speaker 8 00:10:36.930
If say Harvard has as its purpose training persons for certain kinds of limited areas and placing its standards at a very high level there will be some blacks who will be equal to those. And as I say they are the private institutions and they have some public support by way of grants. This sort of thing. To that extent they have a public obligation. But the same time I think the diversity that permits some institutions to concentrate on excellence ought to be continued. All right. And and as you know 75 per cent of the students in higher education are in public institutions to begin with.

Speaker 5 00:11:26.280
That's true. Let's talk about another element of diversity in higher education that's the black colleges. You've been president of two or three black colleges black institutions. You know some of the problems at one time. Most black youngsters who went to college went to black institution. That's true 60 65 percent. Now it's the other way around. But 75 80 percent of black youngsters go to predominantly white or integrated rough version. So roughly 75 percent. Now what is going to happen to black colleges. Do we need them and will they be able to survive given the financial crunch that is hitting all of education recognizing that most black colleges that we're talking about a private because many of the public black institutions are at one time predominately black are becoming more and more integrated as federal and state laws force them to accept anyone first come first served. So where do we stand and and no there's no greater expert in this country on black institutions and Dr. Steven writers formerly president of Hampton Institute and know Fisk University in State College in Bluefield State.

Speaker 1 00:12:31.980
That's right. You were Dean and have to today. Oh that's right it. Let me divide the question. All right go.

Speaker 7 00:12:36.140
First of all you can't answer the question in terms of all black institutions as if they were all of a kind. There are three basic types of black institutions. There is what I called a de facto black institution of which Federal City College in Washington is the best example. As long as the the blacks can concentrate in Washington that's going to be a black institution serving the needs of the blacks in that the city. Another type is the public black institution and that institution survival is gonna be a political decision. In the main.

Speaker 8 00:13:19.830
The private black college that survives is going to survive because it's well managed and it has enough endowment to be excellent in my long lifetime. There'd been only two black colleges that I know that have actually closed their doors because they did not have funds to operate. Do you think. Very briefly is there a need for black institutions. Absolutely.

Speaker 7 00:13:43.740
What is the basis of the bases for it for it is that the first of all some of them are perfectly strong sound American institutions and our national resource in the sense that they are.

Speaker 5 00:13:56.070
And secondly they enroll about a hundred and eighty nine thousand students very many of whom could not go elsewhere we're talking with Dr. Steven Wright who's vice president of the college entrance examination board tonight about opportunities for black youth and higher education and specifically now we're raising the question about the viability and the need for black colleges. And you said Steve. Just a moment ago that there were one hundred eighty nine thousand black youth in these colleges and many of them wouldn't be able to get an education elsewhere. Now given the fact that many public institutions in the south as well as the north are now in a sense open enrollment institutions how do you really justify the statement these youngsters would not get an education if they were not a black college.

Speaker 7 00:14:45.990
Well let's take a couple of dramatic examples first Howard University and married Medical College deal.

Speaker 8 00:14:53.620
Train roughly 85 percent of 80 to 85 percent of all the black physicians trained in this country. Howard University still trains the majority the lawyers trained in this country. And a part of the reason for this is that the admissions standards that we were talking about a few moments ago exclude so many of these black students. Secondly the black colleges tend to have lower tuition and fees than their counterparts whether public or private throughout the southern region. These two factors I think are more important perhaps than any other factors. There is another thing though that to me is is a terribly important thing a number of these colleges all of them as a matter of fact are manned by blacks. It doesn't mean that they exclusively black here black youngsters have an opportunity to see emulate of examples of what they themselves might become and they do not tend to see this in other institutions in any significant numbers for these reasons. I think these institutions ought to continue. Let me give you just one final example. There's an enormous need I think for good policy studies on the whole spectrum of problems that affect and haunt the education of blacks in this country. How do university has with foundation money established an institute for the Study of educational policies that affects blacks. I doubt that any other institution in the country would do that. That is not black but undertake that kind of thing.

Speaker 9 00:16:40.380
Well how do you deal with the allegation that many of these black institution. I think the one hundred and twenty some odd are inferior institutions. And even though they may be providing a shelter for black youth and education that maybe they aren't providing education at black youth will need to compete in tomorrow's world.

Speaker 8 00:17:02.040
I think a number of these colleges are not on trial as American colleges. They've demonstrated over more than 100 years that they prepare black youngsters for the next step in their lives whether that's a graduate school or a professional school. And that is not to deny that some are poor. All of the United Negro College Fund institutions for example are regionally accredited. Yeah. What do you want institutions that have a body when institutions involved in that. I know plenty of white institutions that are not accredited and could not achieve accreditation. I'm not worried about those that are accredited. They have demonstrated over all of these years that they're not on trial as colleges.

Speaker 9 00:17:44.340
Well what about those that are not. We've had Chris Edley of the United Negro College Fund on program. We've talked with some people the various foundations were in a sense it looks as those on the foundations they will the survival of the fittest situation that those who developed the financial resources and the faculty to attract and hold students and provide a good education to the students will survive. And like many of the small women's colleges a small Catholic colleges many the small black colleges will just cease to exist as individual entities maybe join together to form larger entities. Is that a possibility. That's a possibility but I think ought to point out that I'm not here to defend those that have no business to exist and those that are too weak to offer good educational programs. I think the the the law of evolution and the speaks to the survival of the fittest ought to apply to these colleges in the same way that applies to any other effective institutions. But I should point out also I think that the black college is a very tough institution to the best of my knowledge over a long period. I know the two that have actually closed their doors and one is Baker in Louisiana near this door a college that used to be in West Virginia. I think the greater danger is the decrease in the quality of the work that they are likely to do if they should lose their support. I'd much rather see the same kind of support that the best of these colleges get extended to those poorer ones in order that they might be as strong as institutions as some of those to which I could refer. Like Morgan Howard Fisk Morehouse and so on.

Speaker 9 00:19:43.890
Now you travel all over the country you visit black institutions you visit white institutions are you observe the college scene for many years and you certainly talked with students recently since 1970 68 when the upheavals occurred and more and more black students went to predominately white college campuses. What do you think some of the imperatives for black students are. Well one thing it's been observed that whereas many white colleges only the best black students went and they scored high and they did well now because of the fact that they're so numerous. And the fact that many white faculty are not particularly interested in the sort of laissez faire you know do it or not do it attitude among some black students at some of these predominantly white campuses and that's even spill over to some of the predominately black campuses. What in your opinion are the imperatives for black students in higher education. What is the mood of these students today.

Speaker 7 00:20:44.760
It's hard for me to answer the question about moods.

Speaker 8 00:20:47.280
But the first imperative for me would be seeing parity of blacks in colleges in the sense that they are there in the same proportion as whites attend colleges roughly 8 percent of the students in higher education at the present time are black. But as you take this up to the graduate and professional level these numbers drop down in some instances as low as 2 percent. Bearing in mind that the ratio of blacks to the larger population is between 11 and 12 percent. That's the first imperative. The there is an enormous need Roscoe for professional teachers among blacks in all kinds and varieties of of of areas. One illustration is about one black dentist in this country forever thirty seven thousand blacks. Not nearly enough to provide the kind of dental care that blacks ought to have. And it's still true that the black dentists provide most of the dental care that blacks receive. We need and multiply the number of physicians by roughly five and the number of lawyers by a coefficient of roughly six. And only about a less than 2 percent of the engineers in this country are black and these are areas that not only would would do an enormous amount to raise the standard of living in the conditions of life in the black community but would provide these youngsters outlets for their talents.

Speaker 5 00:22:33.360
Of course this raises a couple of interesting questions. One is do blacks have to be served by black professionals and two in the face of a job market which in many areas like engineering teaching is flooded. What good will it do to get a lot of blacks into this. And then finally it raises a question why aren't there more blacks in these fields today.

Speaker 8 00:23:01.350
Money is one of the biggest reasons they're not there. And I should have added the whole financial aid component to the question you ask me some time ago in terms of what black institutions do do they concentrate on providing financial aid for blacks in ways that no other group of institutions do do. Insofar as black physicians are concerned you need physicians in ghetto communities where blacks live. White physicians don't tend to practice in those places. And if we're going to have health services delivered to blacks the black professionals have got to be there and if I may move to black lawyers the whole big thrust or nearly all of it has been carried by black lawyers the whole civil rights legal battle for racial rights and opportunity and equality.

Speaker 9 00:24:00.180
All right now let's talk about black faculty in these institutions of higher education other than black institutions and even for black institutions many black institutions have at least half of their faculty white. What can be done to get more blacks on faculties of the predominantly white institutions in this country and also in the predominately black institutions but specifically related to affirmative action. The fact that there's just so woefully small number of black professors on almost any major campus what can be done to change that picture. Well that's true Roscoe. As you know there are 10 states involved in the Adams vs. Richardson legislate legal battle a number of those institutions are under mandate. Of the federal courts to place more blacks on their faculties to to have those blacks come close to equaling the percentage that blacks are the population. But there is a real problem associated with this. There less than 5000 blacks with P H D degrees in the United States at the present time. That number is going to be increased to the extent that assistance ships and fellowships make it possible for this number to be greatly increased. The Ford Foundation supports a program called National fellowships. The Southern Association of Colleges and secondary schools with the funds from the Carnegie Corporation has a program Southern fellowships but the as good as these are they don't begin to provide the kind of money necessary to enable blacks to go on and spend those five six years necessary to attain doctoral degrees. And one of the big biggest problems I know in this connection is the is the prejudice that operates preventing them from having access to assistance ships and teaching fellowships. These kinds of things which are the source of the aid for the great majority of whites who who pursue this degree now of course this points up in a sense a national dilemma.

Speaker 5 00:26:24.220
You indicated that black college graduates black colleges black professors constitute a national resource. And apparently the so-called free enterprise approach to this is not working. That is there is not enough money for blacks who want to advance themselves into higher programs higher degrees and higher higher education would suggest that there needs to be a concerted effort a concerted political effort a concerted social effort to get federal state and other kinds of support for Blacks in Higher Education. Do you see anything on the horizon that suggests this might occur.

Speaker 8 00:27:04.360
There is very little at the present time at the federal level and most of what's being done. At the state level is being done because of litigation. I wish it were not so. You made an allusion to the to do this is a social concern that ought to involve both the federal government and the and the state governments. I think that is correct and we need a great deal more emphasis on that and how to get it. I wish I knew.

Speaker 5 00:27:36.120
Of course you summarize the issue very well. Unfortunately in today's climate black is not in as it was before and it's necessary for us to intensify our efforts to provide better opportunities for black youth and higher education.

Speaker 10 00:27:49.410
I guess we agree our guest on tonight's sole reason has been Dr. Steven Wright vice president of the college entrance examination board and we've been talking about the overall question of the imperatives for black youth in higher education you've been listening to soul of reason with your host the director of the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr. and featuring a distinguished guest voicing the black experience.

Speaker 2 00:28:17.690
Soul of reason is produced by the W NBC public affairs department in cooperation with the Institute of Afro-American affairs at New York University. Please join us again next week.

